Nicomachus From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search For other people named Nicomachus, see Nicomachus disambiguation . Nicomachus of Gerasa 1   Greek    c. 60  c. 120 AD was an important ancient mathematician best known for his works Introduction to Arithmetic and Manual of Harmonics in Greek . He was born in Gerasa , in the Roman province of Syria now Jerash , Jordan , and was strongly influenced by Aristotle . He was a Neopythagorean , who wrote about the mystical properties of numbers.  citation needed  Contents 1 Life 2 Works 2.1 Introduction to Arithmetic 2.2 Manual of Harmonics 2.3 Lost works 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Life  edit  Little is known about the life of Nicomachus except that he was a Pythagorean who came from Gerasa . Historians consider him a Neopythagorean based on his tendency to view the numbers having mystical properties.  citation needed  The age in which he lived c. 100 AD is only known because he mentions Thrasyllus in his Manual of Harmonics , and because his Introduction to Arithmetic was apparently translated into Latin in the mid 2nd century by Apuleius . 2  His Manual of Harmonics was addressed to a lady of noble birth, at whose request Nicomachus wrote the book, which suggests that he was a respected scholar of some status. 2  He mentions his intent to write a more advanced work, and how the journeys he frequently undertakes leave him short of time. 2  Works  edit  Introduction to Arithmetic  edit  Further information Greek mathematics Introduction to Arithmetic  , Arithmetike eisagoge , the lesser work on arithmetic. As a Neo-Pythagorean , Nicomachus was often more interested in the mystical properties of numbers rather than their mathematical properties.  citation needed  According to Henrietta O. Midonick 1965, he distinguishes between the wholly conceptual immaterial number, which he regards as the divine number, and the numbers which measure material things, the scientific number. 2  3  He writes extensively on numbers , especially on the significance of prime numbers and perfect numbers and argues that arithmetic is ontologically prior to the other mathematical sciences  music , geometry , and astronomy , and is their cause . Boethius  De institutione arithmetica is in large part a Latin translation of this work. However Introduction of Arithmetic does contain quite elementary errors which show that Nicomachus chose not to give proofs of his results because he did not in general have such proofs. Many of the results were known by Nicomachus to be true since they appeared with proofs in Euclid, although in a geometrical formulation. Sometimes Nicomachus states a result which is simply false and then illustrates it with a n example that happens to have the properties described in the result. We can deduce from this that some of the results are merely guesses based on the evidence of the numerical examples. Although he was preceded by the Babylonians and the Chinese , 4  Nicomachus provided one of the earliest Greco-Roman multiplication tables , whereas the oldest extant Greek multiplication table is found on a wax tablet dated to the 1st century AD now found in the British Museum . 5  Manual of Harmonics  edit  Manuale Harmonicum  , Encheiridion Harmonikes . This is the first important music theory treatise since the time of Aristoxenus and Euclid . It provides the earliest surviving record of the myth of Pythagoras s epiphany outside a smithy that pitch is determined by numeric ratios. Nicomachus also gives the first in-depth account of the relationship between music and the ordering of the universe via the  music of the spheres . Nicomachuss discussion of the governance of the ear and voice in understanding music unites Aristoxenian and Pythagorean concerns, normally regarded as antitheses. 6  In the midst of theoretical discussions, Nicomachus also describes the instruments of his time, also providing a valuable resource. In addition to the Manual , ten extracts survive from what appear to have originally been a more substantial work on music. Lost works  edit  The works which are lost are Art of Arithmetic  Greek    , the larger work on arithmetic, mentioned by Photius . A larger work on music, promised by Nicomachus himself, and apparently referred to by Eutocius in his comment on the sphere and cylinder of Archimedes . An Introduction to Geometry , referred to by Nicomachus, 7  although whether it was his work is unclear. Theology of Arithmetic  Greek    , on the Pythagorean mystical properties of numbers in two books mentioned by Photius. There is an extant work sometimes attributed to Iamblichus under this title written two centuries later which contains a great deal of material thought to have been copied or paraphrased from Nicomachus work. A Life of Pythagoras per Iamblichus, one of the main sources used by Porphyry and Iamblichus , for their extant Lives of Pythagoras. A collection of Pythagorean dogmata , referred to by Iamblichus . On Egyptian festivals  Greek     , is mentioned by Athenaeus , but whether by this Nicomachus is uncertain. See also  edit  Monad Dyad Triad Tetrad Nicomachuss theorem Superparticular number Superpartient number Philolaus Notes  edit   Gillian Clark 1989. Iamblichus On the Pythagorean Life . p.  xix. .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  a b c d Henrietta Midonick, 1965, The Treasury of Mathematics, Volume 2 , pages 15-16. Penguin Books.  Henrietta O. Midonick 1965. The treasury of mathematics a collection of source material in mathematics edited and presented with introductory biographical and historical sketches .  Jane Qiu January 7, 2014. Ancient times table hidden in Chinese bamboo strips . Nature News . doi  10.1038nature.2014.14482 .  David E. Smith 1958, History of Mathematics, Volume I General Survey of the History of Elementary Mathematics , New York Dover Publications a reprint of the 1951 publication, ISBN   0-486-20429-4 , pp 58, 129.  Levin, Nicomachus of Gerasa, Grove Music Online .  Nicomachus, Arithmetica , ii. 6. 1. References  edit  Flora R. Levin, Nicomachus of Gerasa, Grove Music Online , visited 3 June 2007. Andrew Barker, editor, Greek Musical Writings vol 2 Harmonic and Acoustic Theory Cambridge Cambridge University Press, 1989, pp.  24569. External links  edit  Wikiquote has quotations related to Nicomachus Nicomachus Introduction to Arithmetic translated by Martin Luther Dooge. OConnor, John J.  Robertson, Edmund F. , Nicomachus , MacTutor History of Mathematics archive , University of St Andrews . Nicomachus Nicomachi Geraseni Pythagorei introductionis arithmeticae libri II recesuit Ricardus Hoche, Lipsiae in aedibus B. G. Teubneri, 1866. Musici scriptores graeci, Aristoteles, Euclides, Nicomachus, Bacchius, Gaudentius, Alypius et medlodiarum veterum quidquid exstat, recognovit prooemius et indice instruxit Carolus Janus, Lipsiae in aedibus B. G. Teubneri, 1895, pagg. 209-282. v t e Ancient Greek mathematics Mathematicians timeline Anaxagoras Anthemius Archytas Aristaeus the Elder Aristarchus Apollonius Archimedes Autolycus Bion Bryson Callippus Carpus Chrysippus Cleomedes Conon Ctesibius Democritus Dicaearchus Diocles Diophantus Dinostratus Dionysodorus Domninus Eratosthenes Eudemus Euclid Eudoxus Eutocius Geminus Heron Hipparchus Hippasus Hippias Hippocrates Hypatia Hypsicles Isidore of Miletus Leon Marinus Menaechmus Menelaus Metrodorus Nicomachus Nicomedes Nicoteles Oenopides Pappus Perseus Philolaus Philon Porphyry Posidonius Proclus Ptolemy Pythagoras Serenus Simplicius Sosigenes Sporus Thales Theaetetus Theano Theodorus Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Thymaridas Xenocrates Zeno of Elea Zeno of Sidon Zenodorus Treatises Almagest Archimedes Palimpsest Arithmetica Conics Apollonius Elements Euclid On the Sizes and Distances Aristarchus On Sizes and Distances Hipparchus On the Moving Sphere Autolycus The Sand Reckoner Problems Problem of Apollonius Squaring the circle Doubling the cube Angle trisection Centers Cyrene Library of Alexandria Platonic Academy Authority control BIBSYS  90603238 BNF  cb13091584x data GND  11864131X ISNI  0000 0003 8557 6449 LCCN  n84805968 NTA  068734816 SELIBR  296326 SUDOC  027047881 VIAF  316786767 WorldCat Identities via VIAF 316786767 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleNicomachus oldid886133282  Categories  60 births 120 deaths 1st-century philosophers 1st-century Greek people 2nd-century Greek people Ancient Greek mathematicians Neo-Pythagoreans People from Jerash Pythagoreans Roman-era philosophers Ancient Greek music theorists 2nd-century writers Hidden categories Articles containing Ancient Greek-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2015 Articles containing Greek-language text Wikipedia articles with BIBSYS identifiers Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with ISNI identifiers Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers Wikipedia articles with NTA identifiers Wikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiers Wikipedia articles with SUDOC identifiers Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers Wikipedia articles with WorldCat-VIAF identifiers