Information Technology Architect Certification From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search This article has an unclear citation style . The references used may be made clearer with a different or consistent style of citation and footnoting .  December 2011   Learn how and when to remove this template message  The IT Architect Certification is an independent global certification program for qualifying the skills, knowledge and experience of IT , Business and Enterprise Architects. This program was developed by The Open Group members in response to the growing demand for experienced IT architects. The Open Group, a vendor- and technology-neutral industry consortium, offers IT Architect Certification to certify skills and experience in the IT architecture community. 1  2  Contents 1 The Program 1.1 Certification levels 1.1.1 Level 1 1.1.2 Level 2 1.1.3 Level 3 2 See also 3 References 4 External links The Program  edit  The program is based on the proven best practices in the industry and sets an independent, industry-wide standard for IT Architects... Under the program, practicing IT Architects can achieve the certification based on demonstrating substantial skills, experience and success in designing solutions across the whole lifecycle. In addition to certifying individuals directly, 3  the program also provides accreditation 4  of third-party IT architect certification programs. The skill and experience requirements for both the Direct Certification and the Accredited programs are the same. The first accredited program  IBM s was announced in January 2006. In addition, a franchise option is available to professional societies and other eligible organizations. Accenture started in 2006 with a similar Master Technology Architect Certification Program to qualify and recognize professionals not just on expertise but also on experience and track record 5  Certification levels  edit  Certification is available at two levels Master Certified IT Architect candidates must be able to perform independently and take responsibility for delivery of systems and solutions as lead architects , and Certified IT Architect candidates must be able to perform with assistancesupervision, with a wide range of appropriate skills, as contributing architects . Level 1  edit  Certified IT Architect candidate is able to perform with assistancesupervision, with a wide range of appropriate skills, as a contributing architect. Certified IT Architect Candidates must be practicing Enterprise  IT Architects and have at least two years experience developing IT architectures with supervision for example, through mentoring . They are expected to have the ability to produce architectures with occasional assistance from more experienced IT Architects e.g., Master Level IT Architects. Level 2  edit  Master IT Architect  Master Certified IT Architect - able to perform independently and take responsibility for delivery of systems and solutions as lead architect. Certified Master IT Architect Candidates must be practicing Enterprise  IT Architects and have at least three years recent experience of developing IT architectures. They must demonstrate having core foundation skills that include people skills, project management skills and architecture skills, and meet requirements related to experience, professional development , and contribution to IT Architecture community. All requirements must be documented in the application. Level 3  edit  Distinguished IT Architect  Distinguished Certified IT Architect  effects significant breadth and depth of impact on the business via one of three advanced career paths ChiefLead Architect, Enterprise Architect or IT Architect Profession Leader. 6  IT Architects that have been certified are listed in a publicly available directory of Certified IT Architects. 7  See also  edit  Software Architecture Information Technology References  edit   McGee, Marianne K. 2006-07-24. Certification Programs Arrive For IT Architects Information Week , retrieved December 18, 2011  Tittel, Ed October 2005. Certification Magazine IT Architects Blueprint for a Future Career Certification Magazine , retrieved December 17, 2008  The Open Group Certified Architect Open CA Program The Open Group , retrieved December 18, 2011  Issue 1.02 2005-11-24. The Guide to Accreditation within The Open Group Certified Architect Open CA Program The Open Group , retrieved December 18, 2011  Accenture Master Technology Architect Program Accenture , retrieved November 6, 2017  DeBeasi, Ryan 2005-09-12. The rise of the IT architect Network World , retrieved October 18, 2005  Certification News Directory of Certified IT Architects The Open Group , retrieved March 6, 2006 External links  edit  Certification and Accreditation documents White paper The Open Group IT Architect Certification Program IASA The Global IT Architect Association Software Development Magazine - Gettin Certified CertCities - Architecture Certifications Point Toward Future Computerworld - A Better Way Cert-Start - Feedback Forum on Certifying Software Development Times - Certification for IT Architects Certification Magazine - The Open Group Launches IT Architect Certification The first accredited IT Architect Certification program IBM announcement Certification Magazine - ITAC and the Enterprise Architect Accenture - Master Technology Architect Program Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleInformation_Technology_Architect_Certification oldid809003301  Categories  Information technology qualifications Professional titles and certifications Hidden categories Wikipedia references cleanup from December 2011 All articles needing references cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from December 2011 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify