Engineering design process From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia    Redirected from Engineering design  Jump to navigation Jump to search This article needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources   Engineering design process     news    newspapers    books    scholar    JSTOR  September 2009   Learn how and when to remove this template message  The engineering design process is a methodical series of steps that engineers use in creating functional products and processes. The process is highly iterative - parts of the process often need to be repeated many times before another can be entered - though the parts that get iterated and the number of such cycles in any given project may vary. .mw-parser-output .templatequoteoverflowhiddenmargin1em 0padding0 40px.mw-parser-output .templatequote .templatequoteciteline-height1.5emtext-alignleftpadding-left1.6emmargin-top0 It is a decision making process often iterative in which the basic sciences, mathematics, and engineering sciences are applied to convert resources optimally to meet a stated objective. Among the fundamental elements of the design process are the establishment of objectives and criteria, synthesis, analysis, construction, testing and evaluation.  ABET 1  The steps tend to get articulated, subdivided, andor illustrated in different ways, but they generally reflect certain core principles regarding the underlying concepts and their respective sequence and interrelationship. Contents 1 Common stages of the engineering design process 1.1 Research 1.2 Design requirements 1.3 Feasibility 1.4 Conceptualization 1.5 Preliminary design 1.6 Detailed design 1.7 Design for manufacturability 1.8 Production planning 2 Comparison with the scientific method 3 See also 4 References Common stages of the engineering design process  edit  One framing of the engineering design process delineates the following stages research, conceptualization, feasibility assessment, establishing design requirements, preliminary design, detailed design, production planning and tool design, and production . 2  Others, noting that different authors in both research literature and in textbooks define different phases of the design process with varying activities occurring within them, have suggested more simplifiedgeneralized models - such as problem definition, conceptual design, preliminary design, detailed design, and design communication . 3  A standard summary of the process in European engineering design literature is that of clarification of the task, conceptual design, embodiment design, detail design . 4  In these examples, other key aspects - such as concept evaluation and prototyping - are subsets andor extensions of one or more of the listed steps. Its also important to understand that in these as well as other articulations of the process, different terminology employed may have varying degrees of overlap, which affects what steps get stated explicitly or deemed high lev el versus subordinate in any given model. Research  edit  Various stages of the design process and even earlier can involve a significant amount of time spent on locating information and research . 5  Consideration should be given to the existing applicable literature, problems and successes associated with existing solutions, costs, and marketplace needs. 5  The source of information should be relevant, including existing solutions. Reverse engineering can be an effective technique if other solutions are available on the market. 5  Other sources of information include the Internet, local libraries , available government documents, personal organizations, trade journals , vendor catalogs and individual experts available. 5  Design requirements  edit  Establishing design requirements and conducting requirement analysis , sometimes termed problem definition or deemed a related activity, is one of the most important elements in the design process, 6  and this task is often performed at the same time as a feasibility analysis. The design requirements control the design of the product or process being developed, throughout the engineering design process. These include basic things like the functions, attributes, and specifications - determined after assessing user needs. Some design requirements include hardware and software parameters, maintainability , availability , and testability . 2  Feasibility  edit  In some cases, a feasibility study is carried out after which schedules, resource plans and estimates for the next phase are developed. The feasibility study is an evaluation and analysis of the potential of a proposed project to support the process of decision making . It outlines and analyses alternatives or methods of achieving the desired outcome. The feasibility study helps to narrow the scope of the project to identify the best scenario. A feasibility report is generated following which Post Feasibility Review is performed. The purpose of a feasibility assessment is to determine whether the engineers project can proceed into the design phase . This is based on two criteria the project needs to be based on an achievable idea, and it needs to be within cost constraints . It is important to have engineers with experience and good judgment to be involved in this portion of the feasibility study. 2  Conceptualization  edit  A concept study  conceptualization , conceptual design  is often a phase of project planning that includes producing ideas and taking into account the pros and cons of implementing those ideas. This stage of a project is done to minimize the likelihood of error, manage costs, assess risks , and evaluate the potential success of the intended project. In any event, once an engineering issue or problem is defined, potential solutions must be identified. These solutions can be found by using ideation , the mental process by which ideas are generated. In fact, this step is often termed Ideation or Concept Generation. The following are widely used techniques 2  trigger word - a word or phrase associated with the issue at hand is stated, and subsequent words and phrases are evoked. morphological analysis - independent design characteristics are listed in a chart, and different engineering solutions are proposed for each solution. Normally, a preliminary sketch and short report accompany the morphological chart. synectics - the engineer imagines him or herself as the item and asks, What would I do if I were the system This unconventional method of thinking may find a solution to the problem at hand. The vital aspects of the conceptualization step is synthesis. Synthesis is the process of taking the element of the concept and arranging them in the proper way. Synthesis creative process is pr esent in every design. brainstorming - this popular method involves thinking of different ideas, typically as part of a small group, and adopting these ideas in some form as a solution to the problem Various generated ideas must then undergo a concept evaluation step, which utilizes various tools to compare and contrast the relative strengths and weakness of possible alternatives. Preliminary design  edit  The preliminary design, or high-level design includes also called FEED or Basic design, often bridges a gap between design conception and detailed design, particularly in cases where the level of conceptualization achieved during ideation is not sufficient for full evaluation. So in this task, the overall system configuration is defined, and schematics , diagrams , and layouts of the project may provide early project configuration. This notably varies a lot by field, industry, and product. During detailed design and optimization, the parameters of the part being created will change, but the preliminary design focuses on creating the general framework to build the project on. 2  S. Blanchard and J. Fabrycky describe it as The whats initiating conceptual design produce hows from the conceptual design evaluation effort applied to feasible conceptual design concepts. Next, the hows are taken into preliminary design through the means of allocated requirements. There they become whats and drive preliminary design to address hows at this lower le vel. Detailed design  edit  Following FEED is the Detailed Design Detailed Engineering phase, which may consist of procurement of materials as well. This phase further elaborates each aspect of the projectproduct by complete description through solid modeling , drawings as well as specifications . Design for manufacturability  edit  Design for manufacturability DFM is the general engineering art of designing products in such a way that they are easy to manufacture. Operating parameters Operating and nonoperating environmental stimuli Test requirements External dimensions Maintenance and testability provisions Materials requirements Reliability requirements External surface treatment Design life Packaging requirements External marking Computer-aided design CAD programs have made detailed design phase more efficient. For example, a CAD program can provide optimization to reduce volume without hindering a parts quality. It can also calculate stress and displacement using the finite element method to determine stresses throughout the part. 7  Production planning  edit  The production planning and tool design consists of planning how to mass-produce the product and which tools should be used in the manufacturing process. Tasks to complete in this step include selecting materials, selection of the production processes, determination of the sequence of operations, and selection of tools such as jigs, fixtures, metal cutting and metal or plastics forming tools. This task also involves additional prototype testing iterations to ensure the mass-produced version meets qualification testing standards. 2  Comparison with the scientific method  edit  Engineering is formulating a problem that can be solved through design. Science is formulating a question that can be solved through investigation. The engineering design process bears some similarity to the scientific method . 8  9  10  Both processes begin with existing knowledge, and gradually become more specific in the search for knowledge in the case of pure or basic science or a solution in the case of applied science, such as engineering. The key difference between the engineering process and the scientific process is that the engineering process focuses on design , creativity and innovation while the scientific process emphasizes Discovery observation . See also  edit  Applied science Axiomatic product development lifecycle APDL Blueprint Design engineer Design review Design science Engineering analysis Engineering optimization Engineering design management Ideal final result Interaction design Marketing New product development Software development process Systems engineering process Surrogate model Traditional engineering References  edit   ABET Definition of Design Engineering design is the process of devising a system, component, or process to meet desired needs . www.me.unlv.edu . Retrieved 22 March 2018 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  a b c d e f Ertas, A.  Jones, J. 1996. The Engineering Design Process. 2nd ed. New York, N.Y., John Wiley  Sons, Inc.  Dym, C.L.  Little, P. 2009. Engineering Design. 3rd ed. New York, N.Y., John Wiley  Sons, Inc.  Pahl, G.  Beitz, W. 1988. Engineering Design a systematic approach. London, UK, The Design Council.  a b c d A.Eide, R.Jenison, L.Mashaw, L.Northup. Engineering Fundamentals and Problem Solving. New York City McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.,2002  Ralph, P., and Wand, Y. A Proposal for a Formal Definition of the Design Concept. In, Lyytinen, K., Loucopoulos, P., Mylopoulos, J. , and Robinson, W., eds., Design Requirements Engineering A Ten-Year Perspective Springer-Verlag, 2009, pp. 103-136.  Widas, P. 1997, April 9. Introduction to finite element analysis. Retrieved from Archived copy . Archived from the original on 2011-05-14 . Retrieved 2010-11-23 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  CS1 maint archived copy as title  link   Braha, Dan Maimon, Oded 1997. The design process properties, paradigms, and structure . IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics-Part A Systems and Humans, 272, 146-166.  Braha, Dan Maimon, Oded 1998. A Mathematical Theory of Design Foundations, Algorithms, and Applications. Springer. Chapter 2 .  Dieter, George Schmidt, Linda 2007. Engineering Design . McGraw-Hill. p.  9. ISBN   978-0-07-283703-2 . Criteria for accrediting engineering programs, Engineering accrediting commission PDF . ABET. Ullman, David G. 2009 The Mechanical Design Process, Mc Graw Hill, 4th edition, ISBN   978-0072975741 Eggert, Rudolph J. 2010 Engineering Design, Second Edition, High Peak Press, Meridian, Idaho, ISBN   978-0131433588 v t e Design Outline Portal Designer Disciplines Communication design Advertising Book design Corporate design Exhibit design Film title design Graphic design Motion Postage stamp design Print design Illustration Information design Instructional design News design Photography Retail design Signage   Traffic sign design Typography   Type design Video design Visual merchandising Environmental design Architecture Architectural lighting design Building design Passive solar Ecological design Environmental impact design Garden design Computer-aided Healthy community design Hotel design Interior architecture Interior design EID Keyline design Landscape architecture Sustainable Landscape design Spatial design Urban design Industrial design Automotive design Automotive suspension design CMF design Corrugated box design Electric guitar design Furniture design Sustainable Hardware interface design Motorcycle design Packaging and labeling Photographic lens design Product design Production design Sensory design Service design Interaction design Experience design EED Game design Level design Video game design Hardware interface design Icon design Immersive design Information design Sonic interaction design User experience design User interface design Web design Other applied arts Public art design Ceramic   glass design Fashion design Costume design Jewelry design Floral design Game art design Property design Scenic design Sound design Stageset lighting design Textile design Other design  engineering Algorithm design Behavioural design Boiler design Database design Drug design Electrical system design Experimental design Filter design Geometric design Job design Integrated circuit design Circuit design Physical design Power network design Mechanism design Nuclear weapon design Nucleic acid design Organization design Process design Processor design Protein design Research design Social design Software design Spacecraft design Strategic design Systems design Approaches Activity-centered Adaptive web Affective Brainstorming By committee By contract C-K theory Closure Co-design Concept-oriented Configuration Contextual Continuous Cradle-to-cradle Creative problem-solving Creativity techniques Critical Design fiction Defensive Designbidbuild Designbuild architect-led Domain-driven Ecodesign Energy neutral Engineering design process Probabilistic design Error-tolerant Fault-tolerant Framework-oriented For assembly For behaviour change For manufacturability For Six Sigma For testing For X Functional Generative Geodesign HCD High-level Inclusive Integrated Integrated topside Intelligence-based Iterative KISS principle Low-level Metadesign Mind mapping Modular New Wave Object-oriented Open Parametric Participatory Platform-based Policy-based Process-centered Public interest Rational Regenerative Reliability engineering Research-based Responsibility-driven RWD Safe-life Sustainable Systemic SOD Tableless web Theory of constraints Top-down and bottom-up Transformation Transgenerational TRIZ Universal Design for All Usage-centered Use-centered User-centered Empathic User innovation Value-driven Value sensitive Privacy by Design choice computing controls flow leadership management marker methods pattern research science sprint strategy theory thinking Tools Intellectual property Organizations Awards Tools AAD Architectural model Blueprint Comprehensive layout CAD CAID Virtual home design software CAutoD Design quality indicator Electronic design automation Flowchart Mockup Product design specification Prototype Sketch Storyboard Technical drawing Web design program Website wireframe Intellectual property Community design Design around Design patent Fashion design copyright Geschmacksmuster Industrial design rights European Union Organizations AIGA Chartered Society of Designers Design and Industries Association Design Council International Forum Design The Design Society Design Research Society Awards European Design Award German Design Award Good Design Award Chicago Good Design Award Japan Graphex IF product design award James Dyson Award Prince Philip Designers Prize Related topics Aesthetics Agile Concept art Conceptual design Creative industries Cultural icon .design Enterprise architecture Futures studies Indie design Innovation Management Intelligent design Lean Startup New product development OODA Loop Philosophy of design Process simulation Slow design STEAM fields Unintelligent design Visualization Wicked problem Design brief change classic competition architectural student director education elements and principles engineer firm history knowledge language life load museum paradigm rationale review specification studio technology Commons Wikibooks Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wiktionary Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleEngineering_design_process oldid910878473  Categories  Engineering Mechanical engineering Systems engineering Hidden categories CS1 errors deprecated parameters CS1 maint archived copy as title Articles needing additional references from September 2009 All articles needing additional references