Polyethylene From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Polythene redirects here. For the Feeder album, see Polythene album . Polyethylene Names IUPAC name Polyethene or polymethylene 1  Other names Polyethene Identifiers CAS Number 9002-88-4   Y Abbreviations PE ChemSpider none ECHA InfoCard 100.121.698 KEGG C19503   Y MeSH Polyethylene PubChem CID 6325 Properties Chemical formula C 2 H 4  n Density 0.880.96  gcm 3 2  Melting point 115135  C 239275  F 388408  K 2  log P 1.02620 3  Magnetic susceptibility   9.6710 6  HDPE , SI, 22C 4  Except where otherwise noted, data are given for materials in their standard state at 25  C 77  F, 100  kPa. Infobox  references The repeating unit within polyethylene in the most stable staggered conformation . Part of a series on Fiber Natural fibers Animal Alpaca Angora Byssus Camel hair Cashmere Catgut Chiengora Guanaco Llama Mohair Pashmina Qiviut Rabbit Silk Sinew Spider silk Wool Vicua Yak Plant Abac Bagasse Bamboo Coir Cotton Flax  Linen  Hemp Jute Kapok Kenaf Pia Pine Raffia Ramie Sisal Wood Mineral Asbestos Man-made fibers Regenerated fibers Art silk Semi-synthetic fibers Acetate Diacetate Lyocell Modal Rayon Triacetate Synthetic fibers Mineral Glass Carbon  Tenax  Basalt Metallic Polymer Acrylic Aramid  Twaron , Kevlar , Technora , Nomex  Microfiber Modacrylic Nylon Olefin Polyester Polyethylene  Dyneema , Spectra  Spandex Vinylon Vinyon Zylon Agriculture and agronomy portal Engineering portal   Category Fibers v t e Polyethylene or polythene abbreviated PE  IUPAC name polyethene or polymethylene  is the most common plastic . As of 2017 update  , over 100 million tonnes of polyethylene resins are produced annually, accounting for 34 of the total plastics market. 5  6  Its primary use is in packaging  plastic bags , plastic films , geomembranes , containers including bottles , etc.. Many kinds of polyethylene are known, with most having the chemical formula C 2 H 4  n . PE is usually a mixture of similar polymers of ethylene with various values of n . Polyethylene is a thermoplastic  however, it can become a thermoset plastic when modified such as cross-linked polyethylene . Contents 1 History 2 Properties 2.1 Mechanical properties of polyethylene 2.2 Thermal properties 2.3 Chemical properties 2.4 Electrical properties of polyethylene 2.5 Optical properties 3 Manufacturing process of polythene or polyethylene 3.1 Monomer 3.2 Polymerization 4 Joining 5 Classification 5.1 Ultra-high-molecular-weight polyethylene UHMWPE 5.2 High-density polyethylene HDPE 5.3 Cross-linked polyethylene PEX or XLPE 5.4 Medium-density polyethylene MDPE 5.5 Linear low-density polyethylene LLDPE 5.6 Low-density polyethylene LDPE 5.7 Very-low-density polyethylene VLDPE 5.8 Copolymers 5.9 Molecular structure of different PE types 5.10 Chain branches 6 Environmental issues 6.1 Biodegradability 6.2 Climate change 7 Chemically modified polyethylene 7.1 Non-polar ethylene copolymers 7.1.1 -olefins 7.1.2 Metallocene polyethylene PE-MC 7.1.3 Polyethylene with multimodal molecular weight distribution 7.1.4 Cyclic olefin copolymers COC 7.2 Polar ethylene copolymers 7.2.1 Ethylene copolymers with unsaturated alcohols 7.2.2 Ethyleneacrylic acid copolymers EAA 7.3 Ethylene copolymers with unsaturated esters 7.4 Crosslinking 7.5 Chlorination and sulfochlorination 7.6 Bio-based polyethylene 8 Nomenclature and general description of the process 9 References 10 Bibliography 11 External links History  edit  Polyethylene was first synthesized by the German chemist Hans von Pechmann , who prepared it by accident in 1898 while investigating diazomethane . 7  8  When his colleagues Eugen Bamberger and Friedrich Tschirner characterized the white, waxy substance that he had created, they recognized that it contained long CH 2  chains and termed it polymethylene . 9  A pill box presented to a technician at ICI in 1936 made from the first pound of polyethylene The first industrially practical polyethylene synthesis diazomethane is a notoriously unstable substance that is generally avoided in industrial application was discovered in 1933 by Eric Fawcett and Reginald Gibson , again by accident, at the Imperial Chemical Industries ICI works in Northwich , England. 10  Upon applying extremely high pressure several hundred atmospheres  to a mixture of ethylene and benzaldehyde they again produced a white, waxy material. Because the reaction had been initiated by trace oxygen contamination in their apparatus, the experiment was, at first, difficult to reproduce. It was not until 1935 that another ICI chemist, Michael Perrin , developed this accident into a reproducible high-pressure synthesis for polyethylene that became the basis for industrial low-density polyethylene LDPE production beginning in 1939. Because polyethylene was found to have very low-loss properties at very high frequency radio waves, commercial distribution in Britain was suspended on the outbreak of World War II, secrecy impo sed, and the new process was used to produce insulation for UHF and SHF coaxial cables of radar sets. During World War II, further research was done on the ICI process and in 1944 Bakelite Corporation at Sabine, Texas, and Du Pont at Charleston, West Virginia, began large-scale commercial production under license from ICI. 11  The breakthrough landmark in the commercial production of polyethylene began with the development of catalyst that promoted the polymerization at mild temperatures and pressures. The first of these was a chromium trioxide based catalyst discovered in 1951 by Robert Banks and J. Paul Hogan at Phillips Petroleum . 12  In 1953 the German chemist Karl Ziegler developed a catalytic system based on titanium halides and organoaluminium compounds that worked at even milder conditions than the Phillips catalyst. The Phillips catalyst is less expensive and easier to work with, however, and both methods are heavily used industrially. By the end of the 1950s both the Phillips- and Ziegler -type catalysts were being used for high-density polyethylene HDPE production. In the 1970s, the Ziegler system was improved by the incorporation of magnesium chloride . Catalytic systems based on soluble catalysts, the metallocenes , were reported in 1976 by Walter Kaminsky and Hansjrg Sinn . The Ziegler- and metallocene-based catalysts families have proven to be very flexible at copolymerizing ethylene with other olefins and have become the basis for the wide range of polyethylene resins available today, including very low density polyethylene and linear low-density polyethylene . Such resins, in the form of UHMWPE fibers , have as of 2005 begun to replace aramids in many high-strength applications. Properties  edit  The properties of polyethylene can be divided into mechanical, chemical, electrical, optical, and thermal properties. 13  Mechanical properties of polyethylene  edit  Polyethylene is of low strength, hardness and rigidity, but has a high ductility and impact strength as well as low friction. It shows strong creep under persistent force, which can be reduced by addition of short fibers. It feels waxy when touched. Thermal properties  edit  The commercial applicability of polyethylene is limited by its comparably low melting point. For common commercial grades of medium- and high-density polyethylene the melting point is typically in the range 120 to 180  C 248 to 356  F. The melting point for average, commercial, low-density polyethylene is typically 105 to 115  C 221 to 239  F. These temperatures vary strongly with the type of polyethylene. Chemical properties  edit  Polyethylene consists of nonpolar, saturated, high molecular weight hydrocarbons. Therefore, its chemical behavior is similar to paraffin . The individual macromolecules are not covalently linked. Because of their symmetric molecular structure, they tend to crystallize overall polyethylene is partially crystalline . Higher crystallinity increases density and mechanical and chemical stability. Most LDPE , MDPE , and HDPE grades have excellent chemical resistance, meaning they are not attacked by strong acids or strong bases, and are resistant to gentle oxidants and reducing agents. Crystalline samples do not dissolve at room temperature. Polyethylene other than cross-linked polyethylene usually can be dissolved at elevated temperatures in aromatic hydrocarbons such as toluene or xylene , or in chlorinated solvents such as trichloroethane or trichlorobenzene . 14  Polyethylene absorbs almost no water . The gas and water vapour permeability only polar gases is lower than for most plastics oxygen , carbon dioxide and flavorings on the other hand can pass it easily. PE can become brittle when exposed to sunlight, carbon black is usually used as a UV stabilizer. Polyethylene burns slowly with a blue flame having a yellow tip and gives off an odour of paraffin similar to candle flame. The material continues burning on removal of the flame source and produces a drip. 15  Polyethylene cannot be imprinted or bonded with adhesives without pretreatment. High strength joints are readily achieved with plastic welding. Electrical properties of polyethylene  edit  Polyethylene is a good electrical insulator . It offers good electrical treeing resistance however, it becomes easily electrostatically charged which can be reduced by additions of graphite , carbon black or antistatic agents . Optical properties  edit  Depending on thermal history and film thickness PE can vary between almost clear  transparent , milky-opaque  translucent  or opaque . LDPE thereby owns the greatest, LLDPE slightly less and HDPE the least transparency. Transparency is reduced by crystallites if they are larger than the wavelength of visible light. 16  Manufacturing process of polythene or polyethylene  edit  Monomer  edit  .mw-parser-output .tmulti .thumbinnerdisplayflexflex-directioncolumn.mw-parser-output .tmulti .trowdisplayflexflex-directionrowclearleftflex-wrapwrapwidth100box-sizingborder-box.mw-parser-output .tmulti .tsinglemargin1pxfloatleft.mw-parser-output .tmulti .theaderclearbothfont-weightboldtext-aligncenteralign-selfcenterbackground-colortransparent width100.mw-parser-output .tmulti .thumbcaptiontext-alignleftbackground-colortransparent.mw-parser-output .tmulti .text-align-lefttext-alignleft.mw-parser-output .tmulti .text-align-righttext-alignright.mw-parser-output .tmulti .text-align-centertext-aligncentermedia all and max-width720px.mw-parser-output .tmulti .thumbinnerwidth100importantbox-sizi ngborder-boxmax-widthnoneimportantalign-itemscenter.mw-parser-output .tmulti .trowjustify-contentcenter.mw-parser-output .tmulti .tsinglefloatnoneimportantmax-width100importantbox-sizingborder-boxtext-aligncenter.mw-parser-output .tmulti .thumbcaptiontext-aligncenter Ethylene ethene The ingredient or monomer is ethylene  IUPAC name ethene, a gaseous hydrocarbon with the formula C 2 H 4 , which can be viewed as a pair of methylene groups  CH 2  connected to each other. Typical specifications are 5 ppm for water, oxygen, and other alkenes . Acceptable contaminants include N 2 , ethane common precursor to ethylene, and methane. Ethylene is usually produced from petrochemical sources, but also is generated by dehydration of ethanol. 14  Polymerization  edit  Ethylene is a stable molecule that polymerizes only upon contact with catalysts. The conversion is highly exothermic . Coordination polymerization is the most pervasive technology, which means that metal chlorides or metal oxides are used. The most common catalysts consist of titaniumIII chloride , the so-called ZieglerNatta catalysts . Another common catalyst is the Phillips catalyst , prepared by depositing chromiumVI oxide on silica. 14  Polyethylene can be produced through radical polymerization , but this route has only limited utility and typically requires high-pressure apparatus. Joining  edit  Commonly used methods for joining polyethylene parts together include 17  Welding Hot gas welding Infrared welding Laser welding Ultrasonic welding Heat sealing Heat fusion Fastening Adhesives 17  Pressure-sensitive adhesives PSAs Dispersion of solvent-type PSAs Polyurethane contact adhesives Two-part polyurethane Epoxy adhesives hot melt adhesives Adhesives and solvents are rarely used because polyethylene is nonpolar and has a high resistance to solvents. Pressure-sensitive adhesives PSA are feasible if the surface chemistry or charge is modified with plasma activation , flame treatment , or corona treatment . Classification  edit  Polyethylene is classified by its density and branching . Its mechanical properties depend significantly on variables such as the extent and type of branching, the crystal structure, and the molecular weight . There are several types of polyethylene Ultra-high-molecular-weight polyethylene UHMWPE Ultra-low-molecular-weight polyethylene ULMWPE or PE-WAX High-molecular-weight polyethylene HMWPE High-density polyethylene HDPE High-density cross-linked polyethylene HDXLPE Cross-linked polyethylene PEX or XLPE Medium-density polyethylene MDPE Linear low-density polyethylene LLDPE Low-density polyethylene LDPE Very-low-density polyethylene VLDPE Chlorinated polyethylene CPE With regard to sold volumes, the most important polyethylene grades are HDPE, LLDPE, and LDPE. Ultra-high-molecular-weight polyethylene UHMWPE  edit  Main article Ultra-high-molecular-weight polyethylene Stainless steel and ultra high molecular weight polyethylene hip replacement UHMWPE is polyethylene with a molecular weight numbering in the millions, usually between 3.5 and 7.5 million amu . 18  The high molecular weight makes it a very tough material, but results in less efficient packing of the chains into the crystal structure as evidenced by densities of less than high-density polyethylene for example, 0.9300.935  gcm 3 . UHMWPE can be made through any catalyst technology, although Ziegler catalysts are most common. Because of its outstanding toughness and its cut, wear, and excellent chemical resistance, UHMWPE is used in a diverse range of applications. These include can- and bottle -handling machine parts, moving parts on weaving machines, bearings, gears, artificial joints, edge protection on ice rinks, steel cable replacements on ships, and butchers chopping boards. It is commonly used for the construction of articular portions of implants used for hip and knee replacements . As fiber , it competes with aramid in bulletproof vests . High-density polyethylene HDPE  edit  Main article High-density polyethylene HDPE pipe on site during installation in outback Western Australia. The white outer layer is co-extruded to provide a reduction of thermal heating, known as Acu-Therm. HDPE is defined by a density of greater or equal to 0.941  gcm 3 . HDPE has a low degree of branching. The mostly linear molecules pack together well, so intermolecular forces are stronger than in highly branched polymers. HDPE can be produced by chromium silica catalysts, ZieglerNatta catalysts or metallocene catalysts by choosing catalysts and reaction conditions, the small amount of branching that does occur can be controlled. These catalysts prefer the formation of free radicals at the ends of the growing polyethylene molecules. They cause new ethylene monomers to add to the ends of the molecules, rather than along the middle, causing the growth of a linear chain. HDPE has high tensile strength. It is used in products and packaging such as milk jugs, detergent bottles, butter tubs, garbage containers, and water pipes . One-third of all toys are manufactured from HDPE. In 2007, the global HDPE consumption reached a volume of more than 30 million tons. 19  Cross-linked polyethylene PEX or XLPE  edit  Main article Cross-linked polyethylene PEX is a medium- to high-density polyethylene containing cross-link bonds introduced into the polymer structure, changing the thermoplastic into a thermoset . The high-temperature properties of the polymer are improved, its flow is reduced, and its chemical resistance is enhanced. PEX is used in some potable-water plumbing systems because tubes made of the material can be expanded to fit over a metal nipple and it will slowly return to its original shape, forming a permanent, water-tight connection. Medium-density polyethylene MDPE  edit  Main article Medium-density polyethylene MDPE is defined by a density range of 0.9260.940  gcm 3 . MDPE can be produced by chromiumsilica catalysts, ZieglerNatta catalysts, or metallocene catalysts. MDPE has good shock and drop resistance properties. It also is less notch-sensitive than HDPE stress-cracking resistance is better than HDPE. MDPE is typically used in gas pipes and fittings, sacks, shrink film, packaging film, carrier bags, and screw closures. Linear low-density polyethylene LLDPE  edit  Main article Linear low-density polyethylene LLDPE is defined by a density range of 0.9150.925  gcm 3 . LLDPE is a substantially linear polymer with significant numbers of short branches, commonly made by copolymerization of ethylene with short-chain alpha-olefins for example, 1-butene , 1-hexene , and 1-octene . LLDPE has higher tensile strength than LDPE, and it exhibits higher impact and puncture resistance than LDPE. Lower-thickness gauge films can be blown, compared with LDPE, with better environmental stress cracking resistance, but they are not as easy to process. LLDPE is used in packaging, particularly film for bags and sheets. Lower thickness may be used compared to LDPE. It is used for cable coverings, toys, lids, buckets, containers, and pipe. While other applications are available, LLDPE is used predominantly in film applications due to its toughness, flexibility, and relative transparency. Product examples range from agricultural films, Saran wrap, and bubble wrap to multilayer and composite films. In 2013, the world LLDPE market reached a volume of US40 billion. 20  Low-density polyethylene LDPE  edit  Main article Low-density polyethylene LDPE is defined by a density range of 0.9100.940  gcm 3 . LDPE has a high degree of short- and long-chain branching, which means that the chains do not pack into the crystal structure as well. It has, therefore, less strong intermolecular forces as the instantaneous-dipole induced-dipole attraction is less. This results in a lower tensile strength and increased ductility . LDPE is created by free-radical polymerization . The high degree of branching with long chains gives molten LDPE unique and desirable flow properties. LDPE is used for both rigid containers and plastic film applications such as plastic bags and film wrap. In 2013, the global LDPE market had a volume of almost US33 billion. 21  The radical polymerization process used to make LDPE does not include a catalyst that supervises the radical sites on the growing PE chains. In HDPE synthesis, the radical sites are at the ends of the PE chains, because the catalyst stabilizes their formation at the ends. Secondary radicals in the middle of a chain are more stable than primary radicals at the end of the chain, and tertiary radicals at a branch point are more stable yet. Each time an ethylene monomer is added, it creates a primary radical, but often these will rearrange to form more stable secondary or tertiary radicals. Addition of ethylene monomers to the secondary or tertiary sites creates branching. Very-low-density polyethylene VLDPE  edit  VLDPE is defined by a density range of 0.8800.915  gcm 3 . VLDPE is a substantially linear polymer with high levels of short-chain branches, commonly made by copolymerization of ethylene with short-chain alpha-olefins for example, 1-butene, 1-hexene and 1-octene. VLDPE is most commonly produced using metallocene catalysts due to the greater co-monomer incorporation exhibited by these catalysts. VLDPEs are used for hose and tubing, ice and frozen food bags, food packaging and stretch wrap as well as impact modifiers when blended with other polymers. Recently, much research activity has focused on the nature and distribution of long chain branches in polyethylene. In HDPE, a relatively small number of these branches, perhaps one in 100 or 1,000 branches per backbone carbon, can significantly affect the rheological properties of the polymer. Copolymers  edit  In addition to copolymerization with alpha-olefins, ethylene can be copolymerized with a wide range of other monomers and ionic composition that creates ionized free radicals. Common examples include vinyl acetate the resulting product is ethylene-vinyl acetate copolymer , or EVA, widely used in athletic-shoe sole foams and a variety of acrylates . Applications of acrylic copolymer include packaging and sporting goods, and superplasticizer , used for cement production. Molecular structure of different PE types  edit  The diverse material behavior of different types of polyethylene can be explained by their molecular structure. Molecular weight and crystallinity are having the biggest impact, the crystallinity in turn depends on molecular weight and degree of branching. The less the polymer chains are branched, and the smaller the molecular weight, the higher the crystallinity of polyethylene. The crystallinity is between 35 PE-LDPE-LLD and 80 PE-HD. Within crystallites polyethylene has a density of 1.0  gcm 3 , in the amorphous regions of 0.86  gcm 3 . Thus, an almost linear relationship exists between density and crystallinity. 13  The degree of branching of the different types of polyethylene can be schematically represented as follows 13  PE-HD PE-LLD PE-LD The figure shows polyethylene backbones, short-chain branches and side chain branches. The polymer chains are represented linearly. Chain branches  edit  The properties of polyethylene are highly dependent on type and number of chain branches. The chain branches in turn depend on the process used either the high-pressure process only PE-LD or the low-pressure process all other PE grades. Low-density polyethylene is produced by the high-pressure process by radical polymerization, thereby numerous short chain branches as well as long chain branches are formed. Short chain branches are formed by intramolecular chain transfer reactions, they are always butyl or ethyl chain branches because the reaction proceeds after the following mechanism Environmental issues  edit  A recyclable bag manufactured from polyethylene. See also Plastic pollution Polyethylene is produced from ethylene, and although ethylene can be produced from renewable resources , it is mainly obtained from petroleum or natural gas . Moreover, the widespread usage of polyethylene poses difficulties for waste management if it is not recycled. Polyethylene, like other synthetic plastics, is not readily biodegradable, and thus accumulates in landfills . Recycling is made easier if marked with a recycling code . This can read PE or 02 for PE-HD or 04 for PE-LD. In Japan, getting rid of plastics in an environmentally friendly way was the major problem discussed until the Fukushima disaster in 2011 became a larger issue. It was listed as a 90 billion market for solutions. Since 2008, Japan has rapidly increased the recycling of plastics, but still has a large amount of plastic wrapping which goes to waste. 22  In 2010, a Japanese researcher, Akinori Ito, released the prototype of a machine which creates oil from polyethylene using a small, self-contained vapor distillation process. 23  Biodegradability  edit  Polyethylene, like other synthetic plastics, is not readily biodegradable, and thus accumulates in landfills. However, there are a number of species of bacteria and animals that are able to degrade polyethylene. In May 2008, Daniel Burd, a 16-year-old Canadian, won the Canada-Wide Science Fair in Ottawa after discovering that Pseudomonas fluorescens , with the help of Sphingomonas , can degrade over 40 of the weight of plastic bags in less than three months. 24  The thermophilic bacterium Brevibacillus borstelensis strain 707 was isolated from a soil sample and found to use low-density polyethylene as a sole carbon source when incubated together at 50  C. Biodegradation increased with time exposed to ultraviolet radiation. 25  Acinetobacter sp. 351 can degrade lower molecular-weight PE oligomers. When PE is subjected to thermo- and photo-oxidization, products including alkanes, alkenes, ketones, aldehydes, alcohols, carboxylic acid, keto-acids, dicarboxylic acids, lactones, and esters are released. 26  In 2014, a Chinese researcher discovered that Indian mealmoth larvae could metabolize polyethylene from observing that plastic bags at his home had small holes in them. Deducing that the hungry larvae must have digested the plastic somehow, he and his team analyzed their gut bacteria and found a few that could use plastic as their only carbon source. Not only could the bacteria from the guts of the Plodia interpunctella moth larvae metabolize polyethylene, they degraded it significantly, dropping its tensile strength by 50, its mass by 10 and the molecular weights of its polymeric chains by 13. 27  28  In 2017, researchers reported that the caterpillar of Galleria mellonella eats plastic garbage such as polyethylene. 29  30  Climate change  edit  When exposed to ambient solar radiation the plastic produces two greenhouse gases , methane and ethylene. Of particular concern is the plastic type which releases gases at the highest rate low-density polyethylene or LDPE . Due to its low density properties it breaks down more easily over time, leading to higher surface areas. The production of these trace gases from virgin LDPE increase with surface areatime, with rates at the end of a 212-day incubation of 5.8 nmol g-1 d-1 of methane, 14.5 nmol g-1 d-1 of ethylene, 3.9 nmol g-1 d-1 of ethane and 9.7 nmol g-1 d-1 of propylene. When incubated in air, LDPE emits gases at rates 2 times and 76 times higher in comparison to water for methane and ethylene, respectively. 31  Chemically modified polyethylene  edit  Polyethylene may either be modified in the polymerization by polar or non-polar comonomers or after polymerization through polymer-analogous reactions. Common polymer-analogous reactions are in case of polyethylene crosslinking , chlorination and sulfochlorination . Non-polar ethylene copolymers  edit  -olefins  edit  In the low pressure process -olefins e.g. 1-butene or 1-hexene  may be added, which are incorporated in the polymer chain during polymerization. These copolymers introduce short side chains, thus crystallinity and density are reduced. As explained above, mechanical and thermal properties are changed thereby. In particular, PE-LLD is produced this way. Metallocene polyethylene PE-MC  edit  Metallocene polyethylene PE-M is prepared by means of metallocene catalysts , usually including copolymers z. B. ethene  hexene. Metallocene polyethylene has a relatively narrow molecular weight distribution , exceptionally high toughness, excellent optical properties and a uniform comonomer content. Because of the narrow molecular weight distribution it behaves less pseudoplastic especially under larger shear rates. Metallocene polyethylene has a low proportion of low molecular weight extractable components and a low welding and sealing temperature. Thus, it is particularly suitable for the food industry. 13   238 32   19 Polyethylene with multimodal molecular weight distribution  edit  Polyethylene with multimodal molecular weight distribution consists of several polymer fractions, which are homogeneously mixed. Such polyethylene types offer extremely high stiffness, toughness, strength, stress crack resistance and an increased crack propagation resistance. They consist of equal proportions higher and lower molecular polymer fractions. The lower molecular weight units crystallize easier and relax faster. The higher molecular weight fractions form linking molecules between crystallites, thereby increasing toughness and stress crack resistance. Polyethylene with multimodal molecular weight distribution can be prepared either in two-stage reactors, by catalysts with two different active centers on a carrier or by blending in extruders. 13   238 Cyclic olefin copolymers COC  edit  Cyclic olefin copolymers are prepared by copolymerization of ethene and cycloolefins usually norbornene  produced by using metallocene catalysts. The resulting polymers are amorphous polymers and particularly transparent and heat resistant. 13   239 32   27 Polar ethylene copolymers  edit  The basic compounds used as polar comonomers are vinyl alcohol  Ethenol , an unsaturated alcohol, acrylic acid  propenoic acid , an unsaturated acid and esters containing one of the two compounds. Ethylene copolymers with unsaturated alcohols  edit  Ethylenevinyl alcohol copolymer EVOH is formally a copolymer of PE and vinyl alcohol ethenol, which is prepared by partial hydrolysis of ethylene-vinyl acetate copolymer as vinyl alcohol itself is not stable. However, typically EVOH has a higher comonomer content than the VAC commonly used. 33   239 EVOH is used in multilayer films for packaging as a barrier layer barrier plastic. As EVOH is hygroscopic water-attracting, it absorbs water from the environment, whereby it loses its barrier effect. Therefore, it must be used as a core layer surrounded by other plastics like LDPE, PP, PA or PET. EVOH is also used as a coating agent against corrosion at street lights, traffic light poles and noise protection walls. 33   239 Ethyleneacrylic acid copolymers EAA  edit  Copolymer of ethylene and unsaturated carboxylic acids such as acrylic acid are characterized by good adhesion to different materials, by resistance to stress cracking and high flexibility. 34  However, they are more sensitive to heat and oxidation than ethylene homopolymers. Ethyleneacrylic acid copolymers are used as adhesion promoters . 13  If salts of an unsaturated carboxylic acid are present in the polymer, thermo-reversible ion networks are formed, they are called ionomers . Ionomers are highly transparent thermoplastics which are characterized by high adhesion to metals, high abrasion resistance and high water absorption. 13  Ethylene copolymers with unsaturated esters  edit  If unsaturated esters are copolymerized with ethylene, either the alcohol moiety may be in the polymer backbone as it is the case in ethylene-vinyl acetate copolymer or of the acid moiety e. g. in ethylene-ethyl acrylate copolymer. Ethylene-vinyl acetate copolymers are prepared similarly to LD-PE by high pressure polymerization. The proportion of comonomer has a decisive influence on the behaviour of the polymer. The density decreases up to a comonomer share of 10 because of the disturbed crystal formation. With higher proportions it approaches to the one of polyvinyl acetate 1.17 gcm 3 . 33   235 Due to decreasing crystallinity ethylene vinyl acetate copolymers are getting softer with increasing comonomer content. The polar side groups change the chemical properties significantly compared to polyethylene 13   224 weather resistance, adhesiveness and weldability rise with comonomer content, while the chemical resistance decreases. Also mechanical properties are changed stress cracking resistance and toughness in the cold rise, whereas yield stress and heat resistance decrease. With a very high proportion of comonomers about 50 rubbery thermoplastics are produced  thermoplastic elastomers . 33   235 Ethylene-ethyl acrylate copolymers behave similarly to ethylene-vinyl acetate copolymers. 13   240 Crosslinking  edit  Main article Cross-linked polyethylene A basic distinction is made between peroxide crosslinking PE-Xa, silane crosslinking PE-Xb, electron beam crosslinking PE-Xc and azo crosslinking PE-Xd. 35  Shown are the peroxide, the silane and irradiation crosslinking. In each method, a radical is generated in the polyethylene chain top center, either by radiation h or by peroxides R-O-O-R. Then, two radical chains can either directly crosslink bottom left or indirectly by silane compounds bottom right. Peroxide crosslinking PE-Xa  The crosslinking of polyethylene using peroxides e. g. dicumyl or di-tert-butyl peroxide  is still of major importance. In the so-called Engel process , a mixture of HDPE and 2   36  peroxide is at first mixed at low temperatures in an extruder and then crosslinked at high temperatures between 200 and 250  C. 35  The peroxide decomposes to peroxide radicals RO, which abstract remove hydrogen atoms from the polymer chain, leading to radicals . When these combine, a crosslinked network is formed. 37  The resulting polymer network is uniform, of low tension and high flexibility, whereby it is softer and tougher than the irradiated PE-Xc. 35  Silane crosslinking PE-Xb  In the presence of silanes e.g. trimethoxyvinylsilane  polyethylene can initially be Si- functionalized by irradiation or by a small amount of a peroxide. Later Si-OH groups can be formed in a water bath by hydrolysis , which condense then and crosslink the PE by the formation of Si-O-Si bridges. 16 Catalysts such as dibutyltin dilaurate may accelerate the reaction. 36  Irradiation crosslinking PE-Xc  The crosslinking of polyethylene is also possible by a downstream radiation source usually an electron accelerator , occasionally a isotopic radiator . PE products are crosslinked below the crystalline melting point by splitting off hydrogen atoms. -radiation possesses a penetration depth of 10 mm , -radiation 100  mm. Thereby the interior or specific areas can be excluded from the crosslinking. 35  However, due to high capital and operating costs radiation crosslinking plays only a minor role compared with the peroxide crosslinking. 33  In contrast to peroxide crosslinking, the process is carried out in the solid state . Thereby, the cross-linking takes place primarily in the amorphous regions, while the crystallinity remains largely intact. 36  Azo crosslinking PE-Xd  In the so-called Lubonyl process polyethylene is crosslinked preadded azo compounds after extrusion in a hot salt bath. 33  35  Chlorination and sulfochlorination  edit  Chlorinated Polyethylene PE-C is an inexpensive material having a chlorine content from 34 to 44. It is used in blends with PVC because the soft, rubbery chloropolyethylene is embedded in the PVC matrix, thereby increasing the impact resistance . It also increases the weather resistance. Furthermore, it is used for softening PVC foils, without risking the migrate of plasticizers. Chlorinated polyethylene can be crosslinked peroxidically to form an elastomer which is used in cable and rubber industry. 33  When chlorinated polyethylene is added to other polyolefins, it reduces the flammability. 13   245 Chlorosulfonated PE CSM is used as starting material for ozone-resistant synthetic rubber . 38  Bio-based polyethylene  edit  Main articles Bioplastics and Renewable Polyethylene Braskem and Toyota Tsusho Corporation started joint marketing activities to produce polyethylene from sugarcane . Braskem will build a new facility at their existing industrial unit in Triunfo, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil with an annual production capacity of 200,000 short tons 180,000,000  kg, and will produce high-density and low-density polyethylene from bioethanol derived from sugarcane. 39  Polyethylene can also be made from other feedstocks, including wheat grain and sugar beet . These developments are using renewable resources rather than fossil fuel, although the issue of plastic source is currently negligible in the wake of plastic waste and in particular polyethylene waste as shown above. Nomenclature and general description of the process  edit  The name polyethylene comes from the ingredient and not the resulting chemical compound, which contains no double bonds. The scientific name polyethene is systematically derived from the scientific name of the monomer. 40  41  The alkene monomer converts to a long, sometimes very long, alkane in the polymerization process. 41  In certain circumstances it is useful to use a structure-based nomenclature in such cases IUPAC recommends polymethylene polymethanediyl is a non-preferred alternative. 40  The difference in names between the two systems is due to the opening up of the monomers double bond upon polymerization. 42  The name is abbreviated to PE . In a similar manner polypropylene and polystyrene are shortened to PP and PS, respectively. In the United Kingdom and India the polymer is commonly called polythene , from the ICI trade name , although this is not recognized scientifically. References  edit   Compendium of Polymer Terminology and Nomenclature - IUPAC Recommendations 2008 pdf . Retrieved 28 August 2018 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  a b Batra, Kamal 2014. Role of Additives in Linear Low Density Polyethylene LLDPE Films . p.  9 . Retrieved 16 September 2014 .  polyethylene_msds .  Wapler, M. C. Leupold, J. Dragonu, I. von Elverfeldt, D. Zaitsev, M. Wallrabe, U. 2014. Magnetic properties of materials for MR engineering, micro-MR and beyond. JMR . 242  233242. arXiv  1403.4760 . Bibcode  2014JMagR.242..233W . doi  10.1016j.jmr.2014.02.005 . PMID   24705364 .  Geyer, Roland Jambeck, Jenna R. Law, Kara Lavender 1 July 2017. Production, use, and fate of all plastics ever made . Science Advances . 3 7 e1700782. Bibcode  2017SciA....3E0782G . doi  10.1126sciadv.1700782 . PMC   5517107 . PMID   28776036 .  Plastics The Facts PDF . Plastics Europe . Retrieved 29 August 2018 .  von Pechmann, H. 1898. Ueber Diazomethan und Nitrosoacylamine . Berichte der Deutschen Chemischen Gesellschaft zu Berlin . 31  26402646. page 2643 Erwhnt sei noch, dass aus einer therischen Diazomethanlsung sich beim Stehen manchmal minimale Quantitten eines weissen, flockigen, aus Chloroform krystallisirenden Krpers abscheiden ... It should be mentioned that from an ether solution of diazomethane, upon standing, sometimes small quantities of a white, flakey substance, which can be crystallized from chloroform, precipitate ...   Bamberger claimed that one of his students, Hindermann, had noted the formation of polyethylene in 1897. Eug. Bamberger  Fred. Tschirner 1900 Ueber die Einwirkung von Diazomethan auf -Arylhydroxylamine On the effect of diazomethane on -arylhydroxylamine, Berichte der Deutschen chemischen Gesellschaft zu Berlin , 33  955959. From footnote 3 on page 956 Die Abscheidung weisser Flocken aus Diazomethanlsungen erwhnt auch v. Pechmann diese Berichte 31, 2643 er hat sie aber wegen Substanzmangel nicht untersucht. Ich hatte brigens Hrn. v. Pechmann schon einige Zeit vor Erscheinen seiner Publication mitgetheilt, dass aus Diazomethan ein fester, weisser Krper entstehe, der sich bei der Analyse als CH 2  x erwiesen habe, worauf mir Hr. v. Pechmann schrieb, dass er den weissen Krper ebensfalls beobachtet, aber nicht untersucht habe. Zuerst erwhnt ist derselbe in der Dissertation meines Schlers Hindermann, Zrich 1897, S. 120. Von Pechmann these Reports , 31 , 2643 also mentioned the precipitation of white flakes from diazomethane solutions however, due to a scarcity of the material, he didnt investigate it. Incidentally, some time before the appearance of his publication, I had communicated to Mr. von Pechmann that a solid, white substance arose from diazomethane, which on analysis proved to be CH 2  x , whereupon Mr. von Pechmann wrote me that he had likewise observed the white substance, but not investigated it. It is first mentioned in the dissertation of my student Hindermann, Zrich 1897, p. 120.  Eug. Bamberger  Fred. Tschirner 1900 Ueber die Einwirkung von Diazomethan auf -Arylhydroxylamine On the effect of diazomethane on -arylhydroxylamine, Berichte der Deutschen chemischen Gesellschaft zu Berlin , 33  955959. From page 956 Eine theilweise  brigens immer nur minimale  Umwandlung des Diazomethans in Stickstoff und Polymethylen vollzieht sich auch bei ganz andersartigen Reactionen ...  A partial  incidentally, always only minimal  conversion of diazomethane into nitrogen and polymethylene takes place also during quite different reactions ...   Winnington history in the making . This is Cheshire . 23 August 2006. Archived from the original on 21 January 2010 . Retrieved 20 February 2014 .  Poly  The All Star Plastic . Popular Mechanics . 91 1. July 1949. pp.  125129 . Retrieved 20 February 2014 .  Hoff, Ray Mathers, Robert T. 2010. Chapter 10. Review of Phillips Chromium Catalyst for Ethylene Polymerization. In Hoff, Ray Mathers, Robert T. eds.. Handbook of Transition Metal Polymerization Catalysts . John Wiley  Sons. doi  10.10029780470504437.ch10 . ISBN   978-0-470-13798-7 .  a b c d e f g h i j k Kaiser, Wolfgang 2011. Kunststoffchemie fr Ingenieure von der Synthese bis zur Anwendung 3. ed.. Mnchen Hanser. ISBN   978-3-446-43047-1 .  a b c Whiteley, Kenneth S. Heggs, T. Geoffrey Koch, Hartmut Mawer, Ralph L. and Immel, Wolfgang 2005 Polyolefins in Ullmanns Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry . Wiley-VCH, Weinheim. doi  10.100214356007.a21_487  How to Identify Plastic Materials Using The Burn Test . Boedeker Plastics . Retrieved 8 May 2012 .  Chung, C. I. 2010 Extrusion of Polymers Theory and Practice . 2nd ed.. Hanser Munich.  a b Plastics Design Library 1997. Handbook of Plastics Joining A Practical Guide . Norwich, New York Plastics Design Library. p. 326. ISBN   1-884207-17-0 .  Kurtz, Steven M. 2015. UHMWPE Biomaterials Handbook. Ultra-High Molecular Weight Polyethylene in Total Joint Replacement and Medical Devices 3rd ed.. Elsevier. p.  3. doi  10.1016C2013-0-16083-7 . ISBN   9780323354356 .  Market Study Polyethylene  HDPE . Ceresana Research. May 2012 . Retrieved 8 May 2012 .  Market Study Polyethylene  LLDPE 2nd. edition . Ceresana. November 2014 . Retrieved 3 February 2015 .  Market Study Polyethylene  LDPE 2nd edition . Ceresana. October 2014 . Retrieved 3 February 2015 .  Prideaux, Eric 3 November 2007. Plastic incineration rise draws ire . Japan Times . Archived from the original on 22 November 2012 . Retrieved 8 May 2012 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Nguyen, Tuan 17 February 2011. New invention turns plastic bags into oil . smartplanet.com . Retrieved 20 February 2014 .  CanadaWorld  WCI student isolates microbe that lunches on plastic bags . The Record.com. Archived from the original on 18 July 2011 . Retrieved 20 February 2014 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Hadad, D. Geresh, S. Sivan, A. 2005. Biodegradation of polyethylene by the thermophilic bacterium Brevibacillus borstelensis . Journal of Applied Microbiology . 98 5 10931100. doi  10.1111j.1365-2672.2005.02553.x . PMID   15836478 .  Tokiwa, Yutaka Calabia, Buenaventurada P. Ugwu, Charles U. Aiba, Seiichi September 2009. Biodegradability of Plastics . International Journal of Molecular Sciences . 10 9 37223742. doi  10.3390ijms10093722 . PMC   2769161 . PMID   19865515 .  Balster, Lori 27 January 2015. Discovery of plastic-eating bacteria may speed waste reduction . fondriest.com.  Yang, Jun Yang, Yu Wu, Wei-Min Zhao, Jiao Jiang, Lei 2014. Evidence of Polyethylene Biodegradation by Bacterial Strains from the Guts of Plastic-Eating Waxworms. Environmental Science  Technology . 48 23 1377684. Bibcode  2014EnST...4813776Y . doi  10.1021es504038a . PMID   25384056 .  Forscherin entdeckt zufllig Plastik-fressende Raupe . Der Spiegel in German. 24 April 2017 . Retrieved 24 April 2017 .  Briggs, Helen. Plastic-eating caterpillar could munch waste, scientists say . BBC News . Retrieved 24 April 2017 .  Royer, Sarah-Jeanne Ferrn, Sara Wilson, Samuel T. Karl, David M. 2018. Production of methane and ethylene from plastic in the environment . PLOS ONE . 13 8 e0200574. Bibcode  2018PLoSO..1300574R . doi  10.1371journal.pone.0200574 . PMC   6070199 . PMID   30067755 .  a b Pascu, Cornelia Vasile Mihaela 2005. Practical guide to polyethylene Online-Ausg.. ed.. Shawbury Rapra Technology Ltd. ISBN   978-1859574935 .  a b c d e f g Elsner, Peter Eyerer, Peter Hirth, Thomas 2012. Domininghaus - Kunststoffe 8. ed.. Berlin Heidelberg Springer-Verlag. p.  224. ISBN   978-3-642-16173-5 .  Elsner, Peter Eyerer, Peter Hirth, Thomas 2012. Kunststoffe Eigenschaften und Anwendungen 8. ed.. Berlin, Heidelberg Springer Berlin Heidelberg. ISBN   978-3-642-16173-5 .  a b c d e Baur, Erwin Osswald, Tim A. October 2013. Saechtling Kunststoff Taschenbuch . p.  443. ISBN   978-3-446-43729-6 . Vorschau auf kunststoffe.de  a b c Whiteley, Kenneth S. 2011. Polyethylene . Ullmanns Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry . doi  10.100214356007.a21_487.pub2 . ISBN   978-3527306732 .  Koltzenburg, Sebastian Maskos, Michael Nuyken, Oskar 2014. Polymere Synthese, Eigenschaften und Anwendungen 1 ed.. Springer Spektrum. p.  406. ISBN   978-3-642-34773-3 .  Chlorsulfoniertes Polyethylen CSM . ChemgaPedia.de  Braskem  Toyota Tsusho start joint marketing activities for green polyethylene from sugar cane Press release. yourindustrynews.com. 26 September 2008 . Retrieved 20 February 2014 .  a b A Guide to IUPAC Nomenclature of Organic Compounds Recommendations 1993 IUPAC, Commission on Nomenclature of Organic Chemistry . Blackwell Scientific Publications. 1993. ISBN   978-0632037025 . Retrieved 20 February 2014 .  a b Kahovec, J. Fox, R. B. Hatada, K. 2002. Nomenclature of regular single-strand organic polymers IUPAC Recommendations 2002. Pure and Applied Chemistry . 74 10 1921. doi  10.1351pac200274101921 .  IUPAC Provisional Recommendations on the Nomenclature of Organic Chemistry  . International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry. 27 October 2004 . Retrieved 20 February 2014 . Bibliography  edit  Piringer, Otto G. Baner, Albert Lawrence 2008. Plastic Packaging Interactions with Food and Pharmaceuticals 2nd ed.. Wiley-VCH. ISBN   978-3-527-31455-3 . Retrieved 20 February 2014 . Plastics Design Library 1997. Handbook of Plastics Joining A Practical Guide illustrated ed.. William Andrew. ISBN   978-1-884207-17-4 . Retrieved 20 February 2014 . External links  edit  Look up polyethylene in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Polyethylene . Polyethylene chemical compound at the Encyclopdia Britannica Polythenes story The accidental birth of plastic bags Polythene Technical Properties  Applications Article describing the discovery of Sphingomonas as a biodegrader of plastic bags Kawawada, Karen, Waterloo Region Record 22 May 2008. Chemistry portal Numismatics portal Disasters portal Electronics portal Volcanoes portal North West England portal v t e Plastics Chemical types Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene ABS Cross-linked polyethylene PEX, XLPE Ethylene vinyl acetate EVA Polymethyl methacrylate PMMA Polyethyl methacrylate PEMA Polyacrylic acid PAA Polyamide PA Polybutylene PB Polybutylene terephthalate PBT Polycarbonate PC Polyetheretherketone PEEK Polyester PEs Polyethylene PE Polyethylene terephthalate PET, PETE Polyimide PI Polylactic acid PLA Polyoxymethylene POM Polyphenyl ether PPE Polypropylene PP Polystyrene PS Polysulfone PES Polytetrafluoroethylene PTFE Polyurethane PU Polyvinyl chloride PVC Polyvinylidene chloride PVDC Styrene maleic anhydride SMA Styrene-acrylonitrile SAN Mechanical types Thermoplastic Thermosetting polymer Duroplast Corrugated plastic Polymeric foam High performance plastics Additives Polymer additive Colorants Plasticizer Stabilizer for polymers Biodegradable additives Filler materials Plastics processing injection moulding plastics extrusion stretch-blow molding thermoforming compression molding calendering transfer molding laminating fiberglass molding pultrusion filament winding vacuum forming rotational molding Products Plastics industry Commodity plastics Engineering plastics High-performance plastics Plastic film Plastic bottle Plastic bag Plastic shopping bag Plastic cutlery Blister pack Foam food container Construction Geosynthetics CategoryPlastics applications Environment and health v t e Health issues of plastics and polyhalogenated compounds PHCs Plasticizers  Phthalates DIBP DBP BBP BBzP DIHP DEHP DOP DIDP DINP Miscellaneous plasticizers Organophosphates Adipates  DEHA DOA  Monomers Bisphenol A BPA, in Polycarbonates  Vinyl chloride in PVC  Miscellaneous additives incl. PHCs PBDEs PCBs Organotins PFCs Perfluorooctanoic acid Health issues Teratogen Carcinogen Endocrine disruptor Diabetes Obesity Obesogen Polymer fume fever Pollution Plastic pollution Great Pacific garbage patch Persistent organic pollutant Dioxins List of environmental health hazards Regulations California Proposition 65 European REACH regulation Japan Toxic Substances Law Toxic Substances Control Act Waste Plastic pollution Great Pacific garbage patch Persistent organic pollutant Dioxins List of environmental health hazards Plastic recycling Biodegradable plastic Identification codes v t e Fibers Natural Plant Abac Bagasse Bamboo Coir Cotton Fique Flax Linen Hemp Jute Kapok Kenaf Pia Pine Raffia Ramie Rattan Sisal Wood Animal Alpaca Angora Byssus Camel hair Cashmere Catgut Chiengora Guanaco Hair Llama Mohair Pashmina Qiviut Rabbit Silk Tendon Spider silk Wool Vicua Yak Mineral Asbestos Synthetic Regenerated Art silk Semi-synthetic Acetate Diacetate Lyocell Modal Rayon Triacetate Mineral Glass Carbon Tenax Basalt Metallic Polymer Acrylic Aramid Twaron Kevlar Technora Nomex Microfiber Modacrylic Nylon Olefin Polyester Polyethylene Dyneema Spectra Spandex Vectran Vinylon Vinyon Zylon Category Commons v t e Packaging General topics Active packaging Child-resistant packaging Contract packager Modified atmospheremodified humidity packaging Package pilferage Package testing Packaging engineering Resealable packaging Reusable packaging Shelf life Shelf-ready packaging Shelf-stable Sustainable packaging Tamper-evident Tamper resistance Wrap rage Product packages Alternative wine closure Beer bottle Box wine Case-ready meat Cosmetic packaging Currency packaging Disposable food packaging Drink can Egg carton Evidence packaging Foam food container Food packaging Glass milk bottle Growler Juicebox Luxury packaging Milk bag Optical disc packaging Popcorn bag Pharmaceutical packaging Plastic milk container Self-heating food packaging Screw cap wine Water bottle Wine bottle Containers Aerosol spray Aluminium bottle Aluminum can Ampoule Antistatic bag Bag-in-box Bag Barrel Biodegradable bag Blister pack Boil-in-bag Bottle Box Bulk box Cage Case Carboy Carton Chub Clamshell Corrugated box design Crate Disposable cup Drum Endcap Envelope Flexible intermediate bulk container Folding carton Glass bottle Inhaler Insulated shipping container Intermediate bulk container Jar Jerrycan Jug Keg Mesh bag Multi-pack Oyster pail Packet container Padded envelope Pail Paper bag Paper sack Plastic bag Plastic bottle Retort pouch Sachet Security bag Self-heating can Shipping container Skin pack Spray bottle Stand-up pouch Steel and tin cans Tetra Brik Thermal bag Tub container Tube Unit load Vial Wooden box Materials and components Adhesive Aluminium foil Bail handle Bioplastic Biodegradable plastic BoPET Bubble wrap Bung Cellophane Closure Coated paper Coating Coextrusion Corrugated fiberboard Corrugated plastic Cushioning Desiccant Double seam Foam peanut Gel pack Glass Hot-melt adhesive Kraft paper Label Lid Linear low-density polyethylene Liquid packaging board Low-density polyethylene Metallised film Modified atmosphere Molded pulp Nonwoven fabric Overwrap Oxygen scavenger Package handle Packaging gas Pallet Paper Paper pallet Paperboard Plastic film Plastic pallet Plastic wrap Polyester Polyethylene Polypropylene Pressure-sensitive tape Pump dispenser Screw cap Screw cap wine Security printing Security tape Shock detector Shock and vibration data logger Shrink wrap Slip sheet Staple fastener Strapping Stretch wrap Susceptor Tamper-evident band Tear tape Temperature data logger Time temperature indicator Tinplate Velostat Processes Aseptic processing Authentication Automatic identification and data capture Blow fill seal Blow molding Calendering Canning Coating Containerization Corona treatment Curtain coating Die cutting Die forming plastics Electronic article surveillance Extrusion Extrusion coating Flame treatment Glass production Graphic design HACCP Hermetic seal Induction sealing Injection moulding Lamination Laser cutting Molding Package tracking Papermaking Plastic welding Plastics extrusion Printing Quality assurance Radio-frequency identification Roll slitting Shearing manufacturing Thermoforming Track and trace Vacuum forming Ultrasonic welding Vacuum packaging Verification and validation Machinery Barcode printer Barcode reader Bottling line Calender Can seamer Cartoning machine Case sealer Check weigher Conveyor system Extended core stretch wrapper Filler Heat gun Heat sealer Industrial robot Injection molding machine Label printer applicator Lineshaft roller conveyor Logistics automation Material-handling equipment Mechanical brake stretch wrapper Multihead weigher Orbital stretch wrapper Packaging machinery Palletizer Rotary wheel blow molding systems Shrink tunnel Staple gun Tape dispenser Turntable stretch wrapper Vertical form fill sealing machine Environment, post-use Biodegradation Environmental engineering Glass recycling Industrial ecology Life-cycle assessment Litter Packaging waste Paper recycling Plastic recycling Recycling Reusable packaging Reverse logistics Source reduction Sustainable packaging Waste management   Category Packaging Authority control NDL  00569150 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitlePolyethylene oldid914462335  Categories  Fibers Polyolefins Dielectrics Ethylene Thermoplastics Packaging materials Transparent materials Bioplastics Commodity chemicals German inventions 1898 in science 1898 in Germany Hidden categories CS1 errors deprecated parameters CS1 German-language sources de Use dmy dates from March 2012 Chemicals that do not have a ChemSpider ID assigned Articles without InChI source Articles without EBI source Articles without UNII source ECHA InfoCard ID from Wikidata Articles containing unverified chemical infoboxes Chembox image size set Pages using collapsible list with both background and text-align in titlestyle Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2017 All articles containing potentially dated statements Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Encyclopdia Britannica links Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers