Computer engineering From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This is the latest accepted revision , reviewed on 29 August 2019 . Jump to navigation Jump to search Hardware engineering redirects here. For engineering other types of hardware, see mechanical engineering . For engineering electrical systems, see electrical engineering . This motherboard used in a HD DVD player is the result of computer engineering efforts. Computer engineering is a branch of engineering that integrates several fields of computer science and electronic engineering required to develop computer hardware and software . 1  Computer engineers usually have training in electronic engineering or electrical engineering , software design , and hardware-software integration instead of only software engineering or electronic engineering. Computer engineers are involved in many hardware and software aspects of computing, from the design of individual microcontrollers , microprocessors , personal computers , and supercomputers , to circuit design . This field of engineering not only focuses on how computer systems themselves work but also how they integrate into the larger picture. 2  Usual tasks involving computer engineers include writing software and firmware for embedded microcontrollers , designing VLSI chips , designing analog sensors , designing mixed signal circuit boards , and designing operating systems . Computer engineers are also suited for robotics research, which relies heavily on using digital systems to control and monitor electrical systems like motors , communications , and sensors . In many institutions of higher learning, computer engineering students are allowed to choose areas of in-depth study in their junior and senior year because the full breadth of knowledge used in the design and application of computers is beyond the scope of an undergraduate degree . Other institutions may require engineering students to complete one or two years of general engineering before declaring computer engineering as their primary focus. 3  4  5  6  Contents 1 History 1.1 History of computer engineering education 2 Education 3 Applications and practice 3.1 Computer hardware engineering 3.2 Computer software engineering 4 Specialty areas 4.1 Coding, cryptography, and information protection 4.2 Communications and wireless networks 4.3 Compilers and operating systems 4.4 Computational science and engineering 4.5 Computer networks, mobile computing, and distributed systems 4.6 Computer systems architecture, parallel processing, and dependability 4.7 Computer vision and robotics 4.8 Embedded systems 4.9 Integrated circuits, VLSI design, testing and CAD 4.10 Signal, image and speech processing 4.11 Quantum computing 5 See also 5.1 Related fields 5.2 Associations 6 References History  edit  Computer engineering began in 1939 when John Vincent Atanasoff and Clifford Berry began developing the worlds first electronic digital computer through physics , mathematics , and electrical engineering . John Vincent Atanasoff was once a physics and mathematics teacher for Iowa State University and Clifford Berry a former graduate under electrical engineering and physics. Together, they created the Atanasoff-Berry computer , also known as the ABC which took 5 years to complete. 7  While the original ABC was dismantled and discarded in the 1940s a tribute was made to the late inventors, a replica of the ABC was made in 1997 where it took a team of researchers and engineers four years and 350,000 to build. 8  History of computer engineering education  edit  The first computer engineering degree program in the United States was established in 1971 at Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland , Ohio . 9  As of 2015 update  , there were 250 ABET -accredited computer engineering programs in the U.S. 10  In Europe, accreditation of computer engineering schools is done by a variety of agencies part of the EQANIE network. Due to increasing job requirements for engineers who can concurrently design hardware, software , firmware, and manage all forms of computer systems used in industry, some tertiary institutions around the world offer a bachelors degree generally called computer engineering. Both computer engineering and electronic engineering programs include analog and digital circuit design in their curriculum. As with most engineering disciplines, having a sound knowledge of mathematics and science is necessary for computer engineers. Education  edit  Computer engineering is referred to as computer science and engineering at some universities. Most entry-level computer engineering jobs require at least a bachelors degree in computer engineering or computer science and engineering. Typically one must learn an array of mathematics such as calculus , algebra and trigonometry and some computer science classes.  citation needed  Sometimes a degree in electronic engineering is accepted, due to the similarity of the two fields. Because hardware engineers commonly work with computer software systems, a strong background in computer programming is necessary. According to BLS, a computer engineering major is similar to electrical engineering but with some computer science courses added to the curriculum. 11  Some large firms or specialized jobs require a masters degree. It is also important for computer engineers to keep up with rapid advances in technology. Therefore, many continue learning throughout their careers. This can be helpful, especially when it comes to learning new skills or improving existing ones. For example, as the relative cost of fixing a bug increases the further along it is in the software development cycle, there can be greater cost savings attributed to developing and testing for quality code as soon as possible in the process, and particularly before release. 12  Applications and practice  edit  The examples and perspective in this section deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject . You may improve this section , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.  July 2018   Learn how and when to remove this template message  There are two major specialties in computer engineering hardware and software. Computer hardware engineering  edit  According to the BLS , Job Outlook employment for computer hardware engineers, the expected ten-year growth from 2014 to 2024 for computer hardware engineering was an estimated 3 and there was a total of 77,700 jobs that same year. Slower than average in their own words when compared to other occupations 13  and is down from 7 for the 2012 to 2022 BLS estimate 13  and is further down from 9 in the BLS 2010 to 2020 estimate. Today, computer hardware is somehow equal  clarification needed  to electronic and computer engineering ECE and has been divided into many subcategories the most significant  citation needed  is embedded system design. 11  Computer software engineering  edit  According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics BLS, computer applications software engineers and computer systems software engineers are projected to be among the faster than average growing occupations The expected ten-year growth as of 2014 for computer software engineering was an estimated seventeen percent and there was a total of 1,114,000 jobs that same year. 14  This is down from the 2012 to 2022 BLS estimate of 22 for software developers. 15  14  And, further down from the 30 2010 to 2020 BLS estimate. 16  In addition, growing concerns over cybersecurity add up to put computer software engineering high above the average rate of increase for all fields. However, some of the work will be outsourced in foreign countries. Due to this, job growth will not be as fast as during the last decade, as jobs that would have gone to computer software engineers in the United States would instead go to computer software engineers in countries such as India. 17  In addition, the BLS Job Outlook for Computer Programmers, 201424 has an 8 a decline, in their words 17  for those who program computers i.e. embedded systems who are not computer application developers. 18  19  Specialty areas  edit  There are many specialty areas in the field of computer engineering. Coding, cryptography, and information protection  edit  Main article Information security Computer engineers work in coding, cryptography, and information protection to develop new methods for protecting various information, such as digital images and music, fragmentation, copyright infringement and other forms of tampering. Examples include work on wireless communications, multi-antenna systems, optical transmission, and digital watermarking . 20  Communications and wireless networks  edit  Main articles Communications networks and Wireless network Those focusing on communications and wireless networks, work advancements in telecommunications systems and networks especially wireless networks, modulation and error-control coding, and information theory. High-speed network design , interference suppression and modulation, design, and analysis of fault-tolerant system , and storage and transmission schemes are all a part of this specialty. 20  Compilers and operating systems  edit  Main articles Compiler and Operating system This specialty focuses on compilers and operating systems design and development. Engineers in this field develop new operating system architecture, program analysis techniques, and new techniques to assure quality. Examples of work in this field include post-link-time code transformation algorithm development and new operating system development. 20  Computational science and engineering  edit  Main article Computational science and engineering Computational Science and Engineering is a relatively new discipline. According to the Sloan Career Cornerstone Center, individuals working in this area, computational methods are applied to formulate and solve complex mathematical problems in engineering and the physical and the social sciences. Examples include aircraft design, the plasma processing of nanometer features on semiconductor wafers, VLSI circuit design, radar detection systems, ion transport through biological channels, and much more. 20  Computer networks, mobile computing, and distributed systems  edit  Main articles Computer network , Mobile computing , and Distributed computing In this specialty, engineers build integrated environments for computing, communications, and information access. Examples include shared-channel wireless networks, adaptive resource management in various systems, and improving the quality of service in mobile and ATM environments. Some other examples include work on wireless network systems and fast Ethernet cluster wired systems. 20  Computer systems architecture, parallel processing, and dependability  edit  Main articles Computer architecture , Parallel computing , and Dependability Engineers working in computer systems work on research projects that allow for reliable, secure, and high-performance computer systems. Projects such as designing processors for multi-threading and parallel processing are included in this field. Other examples of work in this field include development of new theories, algorithms, and other tools that add performance to computer systems. 20  Computer architecture includes CPU design , cache hierarchy layout, memory organization and load balancing . Computer vision and robotics  edit  Main articles Computer vision and Robotics In this specialty, computer engineers focus on developing visual sensing technology to sense an environment, representation of an environment, and manipulation of the environment. The gathered three-dimensional information is then implemented to perform a variety of tasks. These include improved human modeling, image communication, and human-computer interfaces, as well as devices such as special-purpose cameras with versatile vision sensors. 20  Embedded systems  edit  Examples of devices that use embedded systems Main article Embedded systems Individuals working in this area design technology for enhancing the speed, reliability, and performance of systems. Embedded systems are found in many devices from a small FM radio to the space shuttle. According to the Sloan Cornerstone Career Center, ongoing developments in embedded systems include automated vehicles and equipment to conduct search and rescue, automated transportation systems, and human-robot coordination to repair equipment in space. 20  As of 2018 update  , computer embedded computer engineering specializations include system-on-chip design, architecture of edge computing and the Internet of things . Integrated circuits, VLSI design, testing and CAD  edit  Main articles Integrated circuit and Very-large-scale integration This specialty of computer engineering requires adequate knowledge of electronics and electrical systems. Engineers working in this area work on enhancing the speed, reliability, and energy efficiency of next-generation very-large-scale integrated  VLSI  circuits and microsystems. An example of this specialty is work done on reducing the power consumption of VLSI algorithms and architecture. 20  Signal, image and speech processing  edit  Main articles Signal processing , Image processing , and Speech processing Computer engineers in this area develop improvements in human-computer interaction, including speech recognition and synthesis, medical and scientific imaging, or communications systems. Other work in this area includes computer vision development such as recognition of human facial features. 20  Quantum computing  edit  Main article Quantum computing See also  edit  Related fields  edit  Computer programming Electrical engineering Information engineering Software development Systems analyst Associations  edit  Association of Computer Engineers and Technicians References  edit   IEEE Computer Society  ACM December 12, 2004. Computer Engineering 2004 Curriculum Guidelines for Undergraduate Degree Programs in Computer Engineering PDF . p.  iii . Retrieved December 17, 2012 . Computer System engineering has traditionally been viewed as a combination of both electronic engineering EE and computer science CS. .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Trinity College Dublin. What is Computer System Engineering . Retrieved April 21, 2006 . , Computer engineers need not only to understand how computer systems themselves work but also how they integrate into the larger picture. Consider the car. A modern car contains many separate computer systems for controlling such things as the engine timing, the brakes, and the airbags. To be able to design and implement such a car, the computer engineer needs a broad theoretical understanding of all these various subsystems  how they interact.  Changing Majors  Clemson . Clemson University . Retrieved September 20, 2011 .  Declaring a College of Engineering Major . University of Arkansas. Archived from the original on October 12, 2014 . Retrieved September 20, 2011 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   Degree Requirements . Carnegie Mellon University . Retrieved September 20, 2011 .  Programas de Materias in Spanish. Universidad Catlica Argentina.  John Vincent Atanasoff - the father of the computer . www.columbia.edu . Retrieved December 5, 2017 .  Iowa State replica of first electronic digital computer going to Computer History Museum - News Service - Iowa State University . www.news.iastate.edu . Retrieved December 5, 2017 .  History . engineering.case.edu . Case School of Engineering.  Find an ABET-Accredited Program  ABET . main.abet.org . Retrieved November 29, 2015 .  a b Computer Hardware Engineers . Bureau of Labor Statistics. January 8, 2014 . Retrieved July 20, 2012 .  Feabhas_Infographic_FINAL pdf . feabhas . Feabhas.  a b Computer Hardware Engineers Occupational Outlook Handbook . U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.  a b Software Developers Occupational Outlook Handbook . U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.  Computer Software Engineer . Bureau of Labor Statistics. March 19, 2010. Archived from the original on July 26, 2013 . Retrieved July 20, 2012 .  Software Developers . Bureau of Labor Statistics. January 8, 2014 . Retrieved July 21, 2012 .  a b Computer Programmers Occupational Outlook Handbook . U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.  httpswww.bls.govopubregional_reports200908_silicon_valley_high_tech.htm  httpswww.designnews.comdesign-hardware-softwaresoon-be-extinct-embedded-software-engineer39152617858743ADTRKUBM elq_mid4305 elq_cid37479  a b c d e f g h i j Computer Engineering Overview PDF . Sloan Career Cornerstone Center. Archived from the original PDF on September 16, 2012 . Retrieved July 20, 2012 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help  17.  httpswww.ece.iastate.eduthe-departmenthistoryhistory-of-computing 18.  httpscollegegrad.comcareerscomputer-hardware-engineers 19.  httpswww.sokanu.comcareerssoftware-engineer v t e Engineering Civil Architectural Construction Environmental Earthquake Geotechnical Hydraulic Mining Structural Transportation Mechanical Acoustical Aerospace Automotive Marine Railway Thermal Electrical Computer Control Electromechanics Electronics Microwaves Power Radio Frequency Telecommunications Chemical Biochemical Biological Molecular Petroleum Process Reaction Interdisciplinary Audio Biomedical Engineering mathematics Engineering mechanics Engineering physics Engineering science Fire Industrial Information Materials science Ceramics Metallurgy Polymer Mechatronics Military Nanotechnology Nuclear Optical Photonics Privacy Robotics Sanitary Security Software Systems Glossaries Engineering Aerospace engineering Civil engineering Electrical and electronics engineering Mechanical engineering Structural engineering List of engineering branches CategoryEngineering Engineering portal v t e Levels of academic degree Undergraduate ISCED level 5 Associate degree Foundation degree Higher National Diploma   Diploma of Higher Education   Certificate of Higher Education ISCED level 6 Bachelors degree Honours degree Postgraduate ISCED level 7 Masters degree Postgraduate diploma   certificate Diplom degree Engineers degree ISCED level 8 Doctorate Candidate of Sciences Other Postdoctoral Higher doctorate Doktor nauk Habilitation Docent Tenure Fellow No dominant classification Laurea Licentiate Magister degree Professional degree Graduate diploma   certificate Higher diploma Specialist degree   diploma Terminal degree Unearned Honorary degree Ad eundem degree Authority control GND  4196734-3 LCCN  sh85029495 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleComputer_engineering oldid913011744  Categories  Computer engineering Electrical engineering Electronic engineering Computer science Engineering disciplines Hidden categories CS1 errors deprecated parameters CS1 Spanish-language sources es Wikipedia pending changes protected pages Use mdy dates from September 2017 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2015 All articles containing potentially dated statements All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2019 Articles with limited geographic scope from July 2018 USA-centric Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2019 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2018 Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers