WikipediaManual of StyleWords to watch From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia  WikipediaManual of Style    Redirected from WikipediaAvoid weasel words  Jump to navigation Jump to search Project page WPWORDS redirects here. For the policy on words as article topics, see Wikipedia Wikipedia is not a dictionary . For the formatting of words mentioned in text, see WikipediaManual of StyleText formatting   Words as words . For the Words of Wisdom essay, see WikipediaWords of wisdom . WPWTA redirects here. For the Wikipedia Takes America series of events, see WikipediaWikipedia Takes America . WPLABEL redirects here. For Wiki labels gadget, see WikipediaLabels . This guideline is a part of the English Wikipedias Manual of Style . It is a generally accepted standard that editors should attempt to follow, though it is best treated with common sense , and occasional exceptions may apply. Any substantive edit to this page should reflect consensus . When in doubt, discuss first on the talk page . Shortcuts WPMOSWTW MOSWTW MOSW2W MOSWORDS MOSVAGUE This page in a nutshell Be cautious with expressions that may introduce bias, lack precision, or include offensive terms. Use clear, direct language. Let facts alone do the talking. Manual of Style MoS Content Accessibility Biography Disambiguation pages Hidden text Infoboxes Linking Self-references Words to watch Formatting Abbreviations Capital letters Dates and numbers Pronunciation Spelling Text formatting Titles Images Captions Galleries Icons Images Layout Layout Lead section Tables Trivia sections Lists Lists Lists of works Road junctions Stand-alone lists Legal Legal Trademarks By topic area Arts Comics Film Lyrics and Poetry Novels Philosophy Television Video games Visual arts Writing about fiction Music Music samples Record charts Stringed instruments Category Regional Specific naming conventions Canada China and Chinese-related France Hawaii India Ireland Japan Korea Pakistan Philippines Poland Singapore Trinidad and Tobago Religion Islam Latter Day Saints Science Chemistry Computer science Computing Mathematics Medicine Sports Cue sports Snooker Related guidelines Article size Article titles Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Citing sources Hatnotes Military history Signatures Subpages Talk page guidelines Template namespace Understandability User pages Wikimedia sister projects WikiProjects Overview Contents Tips v t e There are no forbidden words or expressions on Wikipedia , but certain expressions should be used with caution, because they may introduce bias. Strive to eliminate expressions that are flattering, disparaging, vague, clichd, or endorsing of a particular viewpoint. The advice in this guideline is not limited to the examples provided and should not be applied rigidly . 1  For example, some words have specific technical meanings in some contexts and are acceptable in those contexts, e.g. claim in law. What matters is that articles should be well-written and consistent with the core content policies Neutral point of view , No original research , and Verifiability . The guideline does not apply to quotations, which should be faithfully reproduced from the original sources see the section on quotations in the main Manual of Style. If you do not feel you can improve the problematic wording of an article yourself, a template message can be added to draw the attention of others to an article needing a cleanup . Contents 1 Words that may introduce bias 1.1 Puffery 1.2 Contentious labels 1.3 Unsupported attributions 1.4 Expressions of doubt 1.5 Editorializing 1.6 Synonyms for said 2 Expressions that lack precision 2.1 Euphemisms 2.2 Clichs and idioms 2.3 Relative time references 2.4 Unspecified places or events 2.5 Survived by 2.6 Person or office 2.7 Neologisms and new compounds 2.8 Easily confused terms 3 Vulgarities, obscenities, and profanities 4 See also 5 References 6 Notes 7 External links Words that may introduce bias Puffery See also WikipediaNeutral point of view .mw-parser-output .module-shortcutboxplainfloatrightborder1px solid aaabackgroundfffmargin0 0 0 1empadding0.3em 0.6em 0.2em 0.6emtext-aligncenterfont-size85font-weightbold.mw-parser-output .module-shortcutlistdisplayinline-blockborder-bottom1px solid aaamargin-bottom0.2emfont-weightnormal.mw-parser-output .module-shortcutanchordivpositionrelative top-3em.mw-parser-output li .module-shortcutanchordivfloatright Shortcuts MOSPUFF WPPUFFERY WPPEA WPPEACOCK WPFLOWERY .mw-parser-output .quoteboxbackground-colorF9F9F9border1px solid aaabox-sizingborder-boxpadding10pxfont-size88max-width100.mw-parser-output .quotebox.floatleftmargin0.5em 1.4em 0.8em 0.mw-parser-output .quotebox.floatrightmargin0.5em 0 0.8em 1.4em.mw-parser-output .quotebox.centeredmargin0.5em auto 0.8em auto.mw-parser-output .quotebox.floatleft p,.mw- parser-output .quotebox.floatright pfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .quotebox-titlebackground-colorF9F9F9text-aligncenterfont-sizelargerfont-weightbold.mw-parser-output .quotebox-quote.quotedbeforefont-familyTimes New Roman,seriffont-weightboldfont-sizelargecolorgraycontent  vertical-align-45line-height0.mw-parser-output .quotebox-quote.quo tedafterfont-familyTimes New Roman,seriffont-weightboldfont-sizelargecolorgraycontent  line-height0.mw-parser-output .quotebox .left-alignedtext-alignleft.mw-parser-output .quotebox .right-alignedtext-alignright.mw-parser-output .quotebox .center-alignedtext-aligncenter.mw-parser-output .quotebox citedisplayblockfont-stylenormalmedia screen and max-width360px.mw-parser-output .quoteboxmin-width100margin0 0 0.8emimportantfloatnoneimportant Words to watch legendary, best, great, acclaimed, iconic, visionary, outstanding, leading, celebrated, award-winning, landmark, cutting-edge, innovative, extraordinary, brilliant, hit, famous, renowned, remarkable, prestigious, world-class, respected, notable, virtuoso, honorable, awesome, unique, pioneering, phenomenonal,   ... Words such as these are often used without attribution to promote the subject of an article , while neither imparting nor plainly summarizing verifiable information. They are known as peacock terms by Wikipedia contributors. 2  Instead of making unprovable proclamations about a subjects importance, use facts and attribution to demonstrate that importance. Peacock example Bob Dylan is the defining figure of the 1960s counterculture and a brilliant songwriter. Just the facts Dylan was included in Time  s 100 The Most Important People of the Century , in which he was called master poet, caustic social critic and intrepid, guiding spirit of the counterculture generation. refs 1  By the mid-1970s, his songs had been covered by hundreds of other artists. refs 2  Articles suffering from such language should be rewritten to correct the problem or may be tagged with an appropriate template 2  if an editor is unsure how best to correct them. Puffery is an example of positively loaded language  negatively loaded language should be avoided just as much. People responsible for public spending the neutral term can be loaded both ways, as the tax-and-spend politicians borrowing off the backs of our grandchildren or the public servants ensuring crucial investment in our essential infrastructure for the public good. Contentious labels Shortcuts WPLABEL WPRACIST MOSTERRORIST Words to watch cult, racist, perverted, sexist, homophobic, transphobic, mysogynistic, sect, fundamentalist, heretic, extremist, denialist, terrorist, freedom fighter, bigot, myth, neo-Nazi, -gate, pseudo-, controversial,   ... Value-laden labelssuch as calling an organization a cult , an individual a racist or sexist , terrorist , or freedom fighter , or a sexual practice a perversion may express contentious opinion and are best avoided unless widely used by reliable sources to describe the subject, in which case use in-text attribution . Avoid myth in its informal sense, and establish the scholarly context for any formal use of the term. The prefix pseudo indicates that something is false or spurious, which may be debatable. The suffix gate suggests the existence of a scandal. Use these in articles only when they are in wide use externally, e.g. Gamergate controversy , with in-text attribution if in doubt. Rather than describing an individual using the subjective and vague term controversial , instead give readers information about relevant controversies. Make sure, as well, that reliable sources establish the existence of a controversy and that the term is not used to grant a fringe viewpoint undue weight. 3  With regard to the term pseudoscience per the policy Neutral point of view , pseudoscientific views should be clearly described as such. Per the content guideline fringe theories , the term pseudoscience may be used to distinguish fringe theories from mainstream science, supported by reliable sources. Unsupported attributions Shortcuts WPWEASEL WPAWW Words to watch some people say, many scholars state, it is believedregardedconsidered, many are of the opinion, most feel, experts declare, it is often reported, it is widely thought, research has shown, science says, scientists claim, it is often said,   ... Weasel words are words and phrases aimed at creating an impression that something specific and meaningful has been said, when in fact only a vague or ambiguous claim has been communicated. A common form of weasel wording is through vague attribution, where a statement is dressed with authority, yet has no substantial basis. Phrases such as those above present the appearance of support for statements but can deny the reader the opportunity to assess the source of the viewpoint. They may disguise a biased view. Claims about what people say, think, feel, or believe, and what has been shown, demonstrated, or proved should be clearly attributed. 4  The examples above are not automatically weasel words . They may also be used in the lead section of an article or in a topic sentence of a paragraph, and the article body or the rest of the paragraph can supply attribution. Likewise, views that are properly attributed to a reliable source may use similar expressions, if they accurately represent the opinions of the source . Reliable sources may analyze and interpret, but for editors to do so would violate the no original research or neutral point of view policies. Equally, editorial irony and damning with faint praise have no place in Wikipedia articles. Articles including weasel words should ideally be rewritten such that they are supported by reliable sources alternatively, they may be tagged with the  Weasel  ,  By whom  , or similar templates to identify the problem to future readers who may elect to fix the problem. Expressions of doubt See also WikipediaManual of Style   Quotation point of view Shortcuts MOSACCUSED MOSALLEGED MOSSCAREQUOTES Words to watch supposed, apparent, purported, alleged, accused, so-called,   ... Also, scare-quoting a Yale report  undue emphasis a Baptist church Words such as supposed , apparent , alleged and purported can imply that a given point is inaccurate, although alleged and accused are appropriate when wrongdoing is asserted but undetermined, such as with people awaiting or undergoing a criminal trial when these are used, ensure that the source of the accusation is clear. So-called can mean commonly named, falsely named , or contentiously named , and it can be difficult to tell these apart. Simply called is preferable for the first meaning detailed and attributed explanations are preferable for the others. Misused punctuation can also have similar effects. Quotation marks, when not marking an actual quotation, may be interpreted as  scare quotes , indicating that the writer is distancing herself or himself from the otherwise common interpretation of the quoted expression. The use of emphasis may turn an innocuous word into a loaded expression. Such occurrences should also be considered carefully. Editorializing See also WikipediaManual of Style   Instructional and presumptuous language Shortcuts WPEDITORIAL WPOPED WPEDITORIALIZING Words to watch notably, it should be noted, arguably, interestingly, essentially, actually, clearly, of course, without a doubt, happily, tragically, aptly, fortunately, unfortunately, untimely,   ... The use of adverbs such as notably and interestingly , and phrases such as it should be noted , to highlight something as particularly significant or certain without attributing that opinion, should usually be avoided so as to maintain an impartial tone . Words such as fundamentally, essentially , and basically can indicate particular interpretative viewpoints, and thus should also be attributed in controversial cases. Care should be used with actually , which implies that a fact is contrary to expectations make sure this is verifiable and not just assumed. Clearly, obviously, naturally , and of course all presume too much about the readers knowledge and perspective and often amount to excess verbiage. Wikipedia should not take a view as to whether an event was fortunate or not. Words to watch but, despite, however, though, although, furthermore, while   ... More subtly, editorializing can produce implications that are not supported by the sources . Words used to link two statements such as but , despite , however , and although may imply a relationship where none exists, possibly unduly calling the validity of the first statement into question while giving undue weight to the credibility of the second. Synonyms for said Shortcuts WPSAID WPSAY WPCLAIM Words to watch reveal, point out, clarify, expose, explain, find, note, observe, insist, speculate, surmise, claim, assert, admit, confess, deny,   ... Said , stated , described , wrote , commented , and according to are almost always neutral and accurate. Extra care is needed with more loaded terms . For example, to write that a person clarified , explained , exposed , found , pointed out , or revealed something can imply it is true, instead of simply conveying the fact that it was said . To write that someone insisted , noted , observed , speculated , or surmised can suggest the degree of the persons carefulness, resoluteness, or access to evidence, even when such things are unverifiable. To write that someone asserted or claimed something can call their statements credibility into question, by emphasizing any potential contradiction or implying a disregard for evidence. Similarly, be judicious in the use of admit , confess , reveal , and deny , particularly for living people , because these verbs can inappropriately imply culpability . Expressions that lack precision Euphemisms Shortcuts WPEUPHEMISM MOSEUPHEMISM MOSEUP Words to watch passed away, gave his life, eternal rest, make love, an issue with, collateral damage, living with cancer,   ... The word died is neutral and accurate avoid euphemisms such as passed away . Likewise, have sex is neutral the euphemism make love is presumptuous. Some words that are proper in many contexts also have euphemistic senses that should be avoided do not use issue for problem or dispute  civilian casualties should not be masked as collateral damage . If a person has an affliction, or is afflicted, say just that living with is vague and presumptuous. Norms vary for expressions concerning disabilities and disabled persons. The goal is to express ideas clearly and directly without causing unnecessary offense. Do not assume that plain language is inappropriate. 5  Clichs and idioms Shortcuts WPCLICHE WPIDIOM MOSIDIOM Words to watch lions share, tip of the iceberg, white elephant, gild the lily, take the plunge, ace up the sleeve, bird in the hand, twist of fate, at the end of the day,   ... Clichs and idioms are generally to be avoided in favor of direct, literal expressions. Lions share is often misunderstood instead use a term such as all, most , or two-thirds . The tip of the iceberg should be reserved for discussions of icebergs . If something is seen as wasteful excess, do not refer to it as gilding the lily or a white elephant . Instead of writing that someone took the plunge , state their actions matter-of-factly. If a literal interpretation of a phrase makes no sense in the context of a sentence, then the sentence should be reworded. Wiktionary has a lengthy list of English idioms , some of which should be avoided. Relative time references See also WikipediaAs of   Precise language , and WikipediaManual of StyleDates and numbers   Chronological items Shortcuts MOSRELTIME MOSREALTIME WPRELTIME Words to watch recently, lately, currently, today, presently, to date, 15 years ago, formerly, in the past, traditionally, thislastnext yearmonthwinterspringsummerfallautumn, yesterday, tomorrow, in the future, now, soon, since, ... Absolute specifications of time are preferred to relative constructions using recently , currently , and so on, because the latter may go out of date. By September 2019 contributions had dropped has the same meaning as Recently, contributions have dropped but the first example retains its meaning as time passes. And recently type constructions may be ambiguous even at the time of writing was it in the last week    month    year 6  The information that The current president, Cristina Fernndez, took office in 2007, or Cristina Fernndez has been president since 2007, is better rendered Cristina Fernndez became president in 2007. Wordings such as 17 years ago or Jones is 65 years old should be rewritten as in 2002, Jones was 65 years old at the time of the incident, or Jones was born in 19 54. When material in an article may become out of date, follow the WikipediaAs of guideline, which allows information to be written in a less time-dependent way. 7  There are also several templates for alerting readers to time-sensitive wording problems. 8  Expressions like formerly, in the past, and traditionally lump together unspecified periods in the past. Traditional is particularly pernicious because it implies immemorial established usage. It is better to use explicit dates supported by sources. Instead of hamburgers are a traditional American food, say the hamburger was invented in about 1900 and became widely popular in the United States in the 1930s. 9  Because seasons differ between the northern and southern hemisphere, try to use months, quarters, or other non-seasonal terms such as mid-year unless the season itself is pertinent  spring blossoms, autumn harvest  see WPSEASON . Unspecified places or events Shortcut WPWHATPLACE Words to watch this country, here, there, somewhere, sometimes, often, occasionally, somehow,   ... As in the previous section, prefer specific statements to general ones. It is better to use explicit descriptions, based on reliable sources, of when, where, or how an event occurred. Instead of saying In April 2012, Senator Smith somehow managed to increase his approval rating by 10, say In April 2012, Senator Smiths approval rating increased by 10, which respondents att ributed to his new position on foreign policy. 1 Instead of saying Senator Smith often discusses foreign policy in his speeches, say Senator Smith discussed foreign policy during his election campaign, and subsequently during his victory speech at the State Convention Center. 2 Remember that Wikipedia is a global encyclopedia, and does not assume particular places or times are the default. We emphasize facts and viewpoints to the same degree that they are emphasized by the reliable sources. Terms like this country should not be used. Survived by See also WPWhat Wikipedia is not   Wikipedia is not a blog, Web hosting service, social networking service, or memorial site  and WPWhat Wikipedia is not   Wikipedia is not a newspaper Shortcut WPSURVIVEDBY Words to watch iswas survived by   ... Phrasing such as Smith died in 1982, survived by her husband Jack and two sons should be avoided in favor of more complete biographical information, such as Smith married Jack in 1957. The couple had two sons, Bill and Ted. She died in 1982. The terms survivors and survived by are used in this way as journalistic and legal shorthand, such as in newspaper obituaries and sources concerned with inheritance. An encyclopedia article, on the other hand, is concerned with a subjects overall notability, not just their death. Articles should describe subjects important relationships, not just list their survivors. Person or office It is necessary for a reference work to distinguish carefully between an office such as President of the United States  and an incumbent such as Donald Trump  a newspaper does not usually need to make this distinction, for a newspaper President Trump and the President are one and the same during his tenure. President Trump nominates new justices of the US Supreme Court  No, whoever is president at the time does. President George W. Bush nominated John Roberts as Chief Justice  Yes, as this will always be true. The President nominated John Roberts as Chief Justice in 2005  Yes, as the year makes this clear. The guest list included Charles, Prince of Wales  This is usually acceptable, as a confusion with Charles I of England, Prince of Wales until 1625, is highly unlikely. Former President Richard Nixon met with Mao Zedong in 1972  This is incorrect because, at the time, Nixon was not a former president he was still in office. Write President Nixon met with Mao in 1972. The construction then-President Nixon is often superfluous, unless the context calls for distinctions between periods of Nixons career, other holders of the office, or between other people also named Nixon. Neologisms and new compounds See also WikipediaWikipedia is not a dictionary   Neologisms Shortcut MOSNEO Neologisms are expressions coined recently or in isolated circumstances to which they have remained restricted. In most cases, they do not appear in general-interest dictionaries, though they may be used routinely within certain communities or professions. They should generally be avoided because their definitions tend to be unstable and many do not last. Where the use of a neologism is necessary to describe recent developments in a certain field, its meaning must be supported by reliable sources. Adding common prefixes or suffixes such as pre- , post- , non- , anti- , or -like to existing words to create new compounds can aid brevity, but make sure the resulting terms are not misleading or offensive, and that they do not lend undue weight to a point of view. Adding -ism to a word, for instance, may suggest a tenuous belief system is well established. Easily confused terms Shortcuts MOSCONFUSE MOSARAB Do not use similar or related words in a way that blurs meaning or is incorrect or distorting. For example, the adjective Arab refers to people and things of ethnic Arab origin. The term Arabic refers to the Arabic language or writing system, and related concepts. Arabian relates to the Arabian peninsula or historical Arabia. These terms are all capitalized , e.g. Arabic coffee and Arabian stallion , aside from a few conventionalized exceptions that have lost their cultural connection, such as gum arabic . Do not substitute these terms for Islamic , Muslim , Islamist , Middle-eastern , etc. a Muslim Arab is someone who is in both categories. Similar concerns pertain to many cultural, scientific, and other topics and the terminology used about them. When in doubt about terminology, consult major modern dictionaries. Vulgarities, obscenities, and profanities Main page WikipediaOffensive material Shortcut WPVULGAR Wikipedia is not censored , and the inclusion of material that might offend is part of its purpose as an encyclopedia . Quotes should always be verbatim and as they appear in the original source . However, language that is vulgar , obscene , or profane should be used only if its omission would make an article less accurate or relevant, and if there is no non-obscene alternative. Such words should not be used outside quotations and names except where they are themselves an article topic. See also WikipediaArticle titles Avoiding redundant subset terms List of English idioms on Wiktionary References  Cocks, Jay June 8, 1998. The Folk Musician . Time . Retrieved September 30, 2017 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Grossman, Loyd. A Social History of Rock Music From the Greasers to Glitter Rock McKay 1976, p. 66. Notes  If a word can be replaced by one with less potential for misunderstanding, it should be. As Ernest Gowers advised in The Complete Plain Words , Be short, be simple, be human.  a b The template  Peacock term  is available for inline notation of such language where used inappropriately.  The template  POV-statement  is available for inline notation of such language where used inappropriately.  The templates  Who  ,  Which  ,  By whom  , or  Attribution needed  are available for editors to request an individual statement be more clearly attributed.  The National Federation of the Blind , for instance, opposes terms such as sightless , in favor of the straightforward blind . Similarly, the same group argues that there is no need to substitute awkward circumlocutions such as people with blindness for the simpler phrase blind people  see Resolution 93-01 , National Federation of the Blind, July 9, 1993, accessed April 26, 2010.  In long-view sciences such as palaeontology,  recent  may have meanings such as within the last 11,700 yearsthe Holocene and will not go out of date.  The as of technique is implemented in the  As of  template it additionally tags information that will become dated.  as of 2019 09 produces the text As of September  2019 update  and categorises the article appropriately. A new widget is currently being developed can usefully become something like a new widget was under development as of 2008 update   or, if supported by a source, it was announced in November 2007 that a new widget was being developed no need for  As of  template. The  Age  template will always display current age when the text is displayed in Wikipedia, but will not be correct for printouts and non-live text a person born on 25 December 2000 will be 18 entered as Age20001225 years old now.  For example, the template  When  is available for editors to indicate when a sentence, or part of one, should be worded more precisely. The  Out of date  template may be used when an articles factual accuracy may be compromised due to out-of-date information.  Original, traditional, authentic, and other distracting terminology External links The Elements of Style Words and Expressions Commonly Misused v t e Manual of Style Overview Directory Tips Content Accessibility Biographies Disambiguation pages Infoboxes Linking Self-references Words to watch Formatting Abbreviations Capitalization Dates and numbers Pronunciation Proper names Spelling Text formatting Titles Images Captions Galleries Icons Images Layout Layout Lead section Tables Trivia sections Lists Embedded lists Lists Lists of works Road junctions Stand-alone lists Legal Legal Trademarks Arts Anime  Manga Comics Film Lyrics and Poetry Novels Television Video games Visual arts Writing about fiction Music Music Music samples Record charts Regional Canada China France Hawaii India Ireland Japan Korea Malaysia Philippines Poland Singapore Trinidad and Tobago Religion Islam Latter Day Saints Science Chemistry Computer commands Mathematics Medicine Taxonomy Sports Cue sports Snooker Related Article size Article titles Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Citing sources Hatnotes Military history Signatures Subpages Talk page guidelines Template namespace Understandability User pages Wikimedia sister projects WikiProjects Search Book Category Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleWikipediaManual_of_StyleWords_to_watch oldid913051330Unsupported_attributions  Categories  Wikipedia Manual of Style content Hidden categories Project pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages