WikipediaWriting better articles From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia    Redirected from WikipediaAUDIENCE  Jump to navigation Jump to search WikipediaTopic redirects here. For information about topic bans, see WPTBAN . This is an explanatory supplement to the WikipediaManual of Style guideline . This page is intended to provide additional information about concepts in the pages it supplements. This page is not one of Wikipedias policies or guidelines , as it has not been thoroughly vetted by the community . Shortcuts WPBETTER WPWBA Contributing to Wikipedia Protocols Editing policy  Content policies  Etiquette guide  Dispute resolution  Simple rule set Simple style manual Introductions About Wikipedia  Administration  How to contribute  Tutorial  Newcomers primer Plain  simple Wikipedia Adventure VisualEditor How-to pages Creating an account How to edit Starting an article  Article wizard  Talk pages  BOLD, revert, discuss  Referencing Renaming Deletion Media Lists Tables Templates Copying text Style tips Wiki markup Writing advice Article development Basic copyediting Layouts Avoiding mistakes Writing better Perfect article Advanced editing Writing about women Community Portal Dashboard Essays Maintenance WikiProjects Editors index Directories FAQs Help index Tools Interactive help Teahouse Help desk v t e Manual of Style MoS Content Accessibility Biography Disambiguation pages Hidden text Infoboxes Linking Self-references Words to watch Formatting Abbreviations Capital letters Dates and numbers Pronunciation Spelling Text formatting Titles Images Captions Galleries Icons Images Layout Layout Lead section Tables Trivia sections Lists Lists Lists of works Road junctions Stand-alone lists Legal Legal Trademarks By topic area Arts Comics Film Lyrics and Poetry Novels Philosophy Television Video games Visual arts Writing about fiction Music Music samples Record charts Stringed instruments Category Regional Specific naming conventions Canada China and Chinese-related France Hawaii India Ireland Japan Korea Pakistan Philippines Poland Singapore Trinidad and Tobago Religion Islam Latter Day Saints Science Chemistry Computer science Computing Mathematics Medicine Sports Cue sports Snooker Related guidelines Article size Article titles Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Citing sources Hatnotes Military history Signatures Subpages Talk page guidelines Template namespace Understandability User pages Wikimedia sister projects WikiProjects Overview Contents Tips v t e This page sets out advice on how to write an effective article, including information on layout, style, and how to make an article clear, precise and relevant to the reader. You can post questions about English grammar and usage at Wikipedias language desk . If you want to peruse some of Wikipedias finest articles, have a look at WikipediaFeatured articles . For information on how to cite sources, see WikipediaCiting sources . For our guidelines on style, see the WikipediaManual of Style and its subsidiary pages, listed in the template to the right. To learn about markup in Wikipedia articles, see WikipediaHow to edit a page . To learn about lists, disambiguation pages, and images, see WikipediaLists , WikipediaDisambiguation , and WikipediaPicture tutorial . Contents 1 Layout 1.1 Structure of the article 1.1.1 Introductory material 1.1.2 Paragraphs 1.1.3 Headings 1.1.4 Images 1.1.5 Standard appendices 1.2 Size 1.2.1 Articles covering subtopics 2 Information style and tone 2.1 Summary style 2.2 Inverted pyramid 2.3 Tone 3 Provide context for the reader 3.1 Evaluating context 3.2 Build the web 3.3 State the obvious 4 Lead section 4.1 Opening paragraph 4.2 First sentence content 4.3 First sentence format 4.4 The rest of the opening paragraph 4.5 The rest of the lead section 4.6 Lead follows body 5 Use other languages sparingly 6 Use color sparingly 7 Use clear, precise and accurate terms 7.1 Be concise 7.2 Principle of least astonishment 7.3 Use of refers to 7.4 Check your facts 7.4.1 Check your fiction 7.4.2 Use of fictional tenses 7.4.3 Stay on topic 7.5 Pay attention to spelling 7.6 Avoid peacock and weasel terms 7.6.1 Examples 7.6.2 Exceptions 7.7 Make omissions explicit for other editors 8 Other issues 9 See also 10 Notes Layout Main page WikipediaLayout Layout matters. Good articles start with introductions, continue with a clear structure, and end with standard appendices such as references and related articles. Structure of the article Introductory material Good articles start with a brief lead section  WPCREATELEAD  introducing the topic. We discuss lead sections in greater detail below . The lead section should come above the first header it is almost never useful to add something like Introduction . Sometimes, the first section after the lead is a broad summary of the topic, and is called Overview, although more specific section titles and structures are generally preferred. Paragraphs .mw-parser-output .module-shortcutboxplainfloatrightborder1px solid aaabackgroundfffmargin0 0 0 1empadding0.3em 0.6em 0.2em 0.6emtext-aligncenterfont-size85font-weightbold.mw-parser-output .module-shortcutlistdisplayinline-blockborder-bottom1px solid aaamargin-bottom0.2emfont-weightnormal.mw-parser-output .module-shortcutanchordivpositionrelative top-3em.mw-parser-output li .module-shortcutanchordivfloatright Shortcut WPPARAGRAPH See also WikipediaManual of StyleLayout   Paragraphs Paragraphs should be short enough to be readable, but long enough to develop an idea. Overly long paragraphs should be split up, as long as the cousin paragraphs keep the idea in focus. One-sentence paragraphs are unusually emphatic, and should be used sparingly. Articles should rarely, if ever, consist solely of such paragraphs. Some paragraphs are really tables or lists in disguise. They should be rewritten as prose or converted to their unmasked form. WikipediaWhen to use tables and WikipediaEmbedded list offer guidance on the proper use of these elements. Headings Shortcut WPHEADER Headings help clarify articles and create a structure shown in the table of contents. To learn about how the MediaWiki software uses sections, see HelpSection . Headings are hierarchical. The articles title uses a level 1 heading, so you should start with a level 2 heading  Heading  and follow it with lower levels Subheading , Subsubheading , and so forth. Whether extensive subtopics should be kept on one page or moved to individual pages is a matter of personal judgment. See also below under Summary style . Headings should not be Wikilinked . This is because headings in themselves introduce information and let the reader know what subtopics will be presented Wikilinks should be incorporated in the text of the section. Images If the article can be illustrated with pictures, find an appropriate place to position these images, where they relate closely to text they illustrate. If there might be doubt, draw attention to the image in the text  illustration right . For more information on using pictures, see WikipediaLayout   Images and WikipediaPicture tutorial . Standard appendices As explained in more detail at WikipediaManual of StyleLayout   Standard appendices and footers , optional appendix sections containing the following information may appear after the body of the article in the following order A list of books or other works created by the subject of the article  works  A list of internal  wikilinks  to related Wikipedia articles  see also  Notes and references  notes, footnotes, or references  A list of recommended relevant books, articles, or other publications that have not been used as sources  further reading  A list of recommended relevant websites that have not been used as sources  external links . With some exceptions, any links to sister projects appear in further reading or external links sections. Succession boxes and navigational footers go at the end of the article, following the last appendix section, but preceding the category and interwiki templates. Size Shortcut WPBETTERSIZE See also WikipediaArticle size Excessively long articles should usually be avoided. Articles should ideally contain less than 50,000 characters of text. 1  When articles grow past this amount of readable text, they can be split into smaller articles to improve readability and ease of editing, or may require trimming to remain concise . The headed sub-section should be retained, with a concise version of what has been removed under an italicized header, such as Main article History of Ruritania a list of templates used to create these headers is available at CategoryWikipedia page-section templates . Otherwise, context is lost and the general treatment suffers. Each article on a subtopic should be written as a stand-alone articlethat is, it should have a lead section, headings, et cetera. When an article is long and has many sub articles, try to balance the main page. Do not put undue weight into one part of an article at the cost of other parts. In shorter articles, if one subtopic has much more text than another subtopic, that may be an indication the subtopic should have its own page, with only a summary presented on the main page. Articles covering subtopics Wikipedia articles tend to grow in a way that leads to the natural creation of new articles. The text of any article consists of a sequence of related but distinct subtopics. When there is enough text in a given subtopic to merit its own article, that text can be summarized in the present article and a link provided to the more detailed article. Cricket is an example of an article covering subtopics it is divided into subsections that give an overview of the sport, with each subsection leading to one or more subtopic articles. Information style and tone Two styles, closely related and not mutually exclusive, tend to be used for Wikipedia articles. The tone , however, should always remain formal , impersonal , and dispassionate . These styles are summary style , which is the arrangement of a broad topic into a main article and side articles, each with subtopical sections and the inverted pyramid style or news style, though this term is ambiguous, which prioritizes key information to the top, followed by supporting material and details, with background information at the bottom. A feature of both styles, and of all Wikipedia articles, is the presence of the lead section , a summarizing overview of the most important facts about the topic. The infobox template found at the top of many articles is a further distillation of key points. Summary style Main page WikipediaSummary style Summary style may apply both across a category of articles and within an article. Material is grouped and divided into sections that logically form discrete subtopics, and which over time may spin off to separate articles, to prevent excessive article length as the main article grows. As each subtopic is spun off, a concise summary of it is left behind with a pointer usually using the  Main  template to the new side article. There are three main advantages to using summary style Different readers want varying amounts of detail, and this style permits them to choose how much they are exposed to. Some readers need just a quick summary and are satisfied by the lead section others seek a moderate amount of info, and will find the main article suitable to their needs yet others want a lot of detail, and will be interested in reading the side articles. An article that is too long becomes tedious to read. Progressively summarizing and spinning off material avoids overwhelming the reader with too much text at once. An excessively detailed article is often one that repeats itself or exhibits writing that could be more concise. The development of summary-style articles tends to naturally clear out redundancy and bloat, though in a multi-article topic this comes at the cost of some necessary cross-article redundancy i.e., a summary of one article in another. The exact organizing principle of a particular summary-style article is highly context-dependent, with various options, such as chronological, geographical, and alphabetical primarily in lists, among others. Some examples of summary style are the featured articles Association football and Music of the Lesser Antilles . Inverted pyramid See also WikipediaToo long didnt read Shortcut WPPYRAMID Some Wikipedians prefer using the inverted pyramid structure of journalism . This information presentation technique is found in short, direct, front-page newspaper stories and the news bulletins that air on radio and television. This is a style used only within a single article, not across a category of them. The main feature of the inverted pyramid is placement of important information first, with a decreasing importance as the article advances. Originally developed so that the editors could cut from the bottom to fit an item into the available layout space, this style encourages brevity and prioritizes information, because many people expect to find important material early, and l ess important information later, where interest decreases. Encyclopedia articles are not required to be in inverted pyramid order, and often arent, especially when complex. However, a familiarity with this convention may help in planning the style and layout of an article for which this approach is a good fit. Inverted-pyramid style is most often used with articles in which a chronological, geographical, or other order will not be helpful. Common examples are short-ter m events, concise biographies of persons notable for only one thing, and other articles where there are not likely to be many logical subtopics, but a number of facts to prioritize for the reader. The lead section common to all Wikipedia articles is, in essence, a limited application of the inverted pyramid approach. Virtually all stub articles should be created in inverted-pyramid style, since they basically consist of just a lead section. Consequently, many articles begin as inverted-pyramid pieces and change to summary style later as the topic develops, often combining the approaches by retaining a general inverted pyramid structure, but dividing the background material subtopically, with summary pointer s to other articles. Tone Shortcuts WPCOLLOQUIAL WPFORMAL WPSLANG WPTONE WPNARRATOR WPSLANG redirects here. For the policy that covers writing Wikipedia articles about slang terms, see WPNOTSLANG . See also WikipediaNeutral point of view   Impartial tone Wikipedia is not a manual, guidebook, textbook, or scientific journal . Articles and other encyclopedic content should be written in a formal tone . Standards for formal tone vary a bit depending upon the subject matter but should usually match the style used in Featured - and Good -class articles in the same category. Encyclopedic writing has a fairly academic approach, while remaining clear and understandable. Formal tone means that the article should not be written using argot , slang , colloquialisms , doublespeak , legalese , or jargon that is unintelligible to an average reader it means that the English language should be used in a businesslike manner. Articles should not be written from a first- or second-person perspective. In prose writing, the first-person  Imemy and weusour  point of view and second-person  you and your  point of view typically evoke a strong narrator. While this is acceptable in works of fiction and in monographs, it is unsuitable in an encyclopedia, where the writer should be invisible to the reader. Moreover, pertaining specifically to Wikipedias policies, the first person often inappropriately implies a point of view inconsistent with the neutrality policy , while second person is associated with the step-by-step instructions of a how-to guide, which Wikipedia is not . First- and second-person pronouns should ordinarily be used only in attributed direct quotations relevant to the subject of the article. As with many such guidelines, however, there can be occasional exceptions. For instance, the  inclusive we  is widely used in professional mathematics writing, and though discouraged on Wikipedia even for that subject , it has sometimes been used when presenting and explaining examples. Use common sense to determine whether the chosen perspective is in the spirit of the guidelines. Gender-neutral pronouns should be used or pronouns avoided where the gender is not specific. See WPGender-neutral language , and WPManual of Style   Identity , for further information. Punctuation marks that appear in the article should be used only per generally accepted practice. Exclamation marks  should be used only if they occur in direct quotations. This is generally true of question marks  as well do not pose rhetorical questions for the reader. 2  As a matter of policy , Wikipedia is not written in news style in any sense other than some use of the inverted pyramid , above, including tone. The encyclopedic and journalistic intent and audience are different. Especially avoid bombastic wording , attempts at humor or cleverness, reliance on primary sources , editorializing , recentism , pull quotes , journalese , and headlinese . Similarly, avoid news styles close sibling, persuasive style , which has many of those faults and more of its own, most often various kinds of appeals to emotion and related fallacies . This style is used in press releases, advertising, op-ed writing, activism, propaganda, proposals, formal debate, reviews, and much tabloid and sometimes investigative journalism. It is not Wikipedias role to try to convince the reader of anything, only to provide the salient facts as best they can be determined, and the reliable sources for them. Not all tone flaws are immediately obvious as bias, original research, or other policy problems, but may be relevance, register , or other content-presentation issues. A common one is the idea, often taught to debate students, that each section or even paragraph should introduce a key statement a thesis  followed by supporting evidence in additional sentences, and finish with a recapitulation of the original thesis in different wording. This style is redundant and brow-beating, and should not be used in encyclopedic writing. 3  Another error of writing approach is attempting to make bits of material pop an undue weight problem, such as with excessive emphasis , over- capitalization , use of contractions , unnecessary acronyms and other abbreviations , the inclusion of hyperbolic adjectives and adverbs, or the use of unusual synonyms or loaded words . Just present the sourced information without embellishment, agenda, fanfare, cleverness, or conversational tone. A related presentation problem is info-dumping by presenting information in the form of a long, bulleted list when it would be better as normal prose paragraphs . This is especially true when the items in the list are not of equal importance or are not really comparable in some other way, and need context. Using explanatory prose also helps identify and remove trivia  if we cannot explain to readers why something is important , then it is not important. Provide context for the reader Shortcuts WPPCR WPAUDIENCE WPPCR redirects here. For the pending changes reviewer user rights, see WikipediaReviewing pending changes . WPAUDIENCE redirects here. For guideline on notability of companies with regards to reach of sources, see WikipediaNotability organizations and companies   Audience . For context and linking, see WikipediaManual of StyleLinking . Wikipedia is an international encyclopedia. People who read Wikipedia have different backgrounds, education and opinions. Make your article accessible and understandable for as many readers as possible. Assume readers are reading the article to learn. It is possible that the reader knows nothing about the subject, so the article needs to explain the subject fully. Avoid using jargon whenever possible. Consider the reader. An article entitled Use of chromatic scales in early Baroque music is likely to be read by musicians, and technical details and terms are appropriate, linking to articles explaining the technical terms. On the other hand, an article entitled Baroque music is likely to be read by laypersons who want a brief and plainly written overvie w, with links to available detailed information. When jargon is used in an article, a brief explanation should be given within the article. Aim for a balance between comprehensibility and detail so that readers can gain information from the article. Evaluating context Here are some thought experiments to help you test whether you are setting enough context Does the article make sense if the reader gets to it as a random page  SpecialRandom  Imagine yourself as a layperson in another English-speaking country. Can you figure out what the article is about Can people tell what the article is about if the first page is printed out and passed around Would a reader want to follow some of the links Do sentences still make sense if they cant Build the web Main page WikipediaManual of Style linking Remember that every Wikipedia article is tightly connected to a network of other topics. Establishing such connections via wikilink is a good way to establish context. Because Wikipedia is not a long, ordered sequence of carefully categorized articles like a paper encyclopedia, but a collection of randomly accessible, highly interlinked ones, each article should contain links t o more general subjects that serve to categorize the article. When creating links, do not go overboard, and be careful to make your links relevant. It is not necessary to link the same term twelve times although if it appears in the lead, then near the end, it might be a good idea to link it twice. Avoid making your articles orphans . When you write a new article, make sure that one or more other pages link to it, to lessen the chances that your article will be orphaned through someone elses refactoring . Otherwise, when it falls off the bottom of the Recent Changes page, it will disappear into the Mariana Trench . There should always be an unbroken chain of links leading from the Main Page to every article in Wikipedia following the path you would expect to use to find your article may give you some hints as to which articles should link to your article. State the obvious Shortcut WPOBVIOUS WPOBVIOUS redirects here. For the essay about over-citing obvious things, see WikipediaYou dont need to cite that the sky is blue . State facts that may be obvious to you, but are not necessarily obvious to the reader. Usually, such a statement will be in the first sentence or two of the article. For example, consider this sentence The Ford Thunderbird was conceived as a response to the Chevrolet Corvette and entered production for the 1955 model year. Here no mention is made of the Ford Thunderbirds fundamental nature it is an automobile . It assumes that the reader already knows thisan assumption that may not be correct, especially if the reader is not familiar with Ford or Chevrolet . Perhaps instead The Ford Thunderbird was a car manufactured in the United States by the Ford Motor Company . However, there is no need to go overboard. There is no need to explain a common word like car. Repetition is usually unnecessary, for example Shoichi Yokoi was conscripted into the Imperial Japanese Army in 1941. conveys enough information although it is not a good first sentence. However, the following is not only verbose but redundant  Shoichi Yokoi was a Japanese soldier in Japan who was drafted into the Imperial Japanese Army in 1941. Lead section As explained in more detail at WikipediaLead section   Introductory text , all but the shortest articles should start with introductory text the lead. The lead should establish significance, include mention of consequential or significant criticism or controversies, and be written in a way that makes readers want to know more. The appropriate length of the lead depends on that of the article, but should normally be no more than four paragraphs. The lead itself has no heading and, on pages with more than three headings, automatically appears above the table of contents, if present. Opening paragraph Shortcut WPBETTERGRAF1 Normally, the opening paragraph summarizes the most important points of the article. It should clearly explain the subject so that the reader is prepared for the greater level of detail that follows. If further introductory material is appropriate before the first section, it can be covered in subsequent paragraphs in the lead. Introductions to biographical articles commonly do uble as summaries, listing the best-known achievements of the subject. Because some readers will read only the opening of an article, the most vital information should be included. First sentence content The article should begin with a short declarative sentence, answering two questions for the nonspecialist reader What or who is the subject and Why is this subject notable  4  If possible, the page title should be the subject of the first sentence 5  However, if the article title is merely descriptivesuch as Electrical characteristics of dynamic loudspeakers the title does not need to appear verbatim in the main text. Similarly, where an article title is of the type List of  ..., a clearer and more informative introduction to the list is better than verbatim repetition of the title. When the page title is used as the subject of the first sentence, it may appear in a slightly different form, and it may include variations. 6  Similarly, if the title has a parenthetical disambiguator, the disambiguator should be omitted in the text. 7  If its subject is amenable to definition, then the first sentence should give a concise definition where possible, one that puts the article in context for the nonspecialist. 8  Similarly, if the subject is a term of art , provide the context as early as possible. 9  If the article is about a fictional character or place, make sure to say so. 10  First sentence format As a general rule, the first and only the first appearance of the page title should be in boldface as early as possible in the first sentence An electron is a subatomic particle that carries a negative electric charge . However, if the title of a page is descriptive and does not appear verbatim in the main text, then it should not be in boldface. So, for example, Electrical characteristics of dynamic loudspeakers begins with The chief electrical characteristic of a dynamic loudspeaker s driver is its electrical impedance as a function of frequency . If the subject of the page is normally italicized for example, a work of art, literature, album, or ship then its first mention should be both bold and italic text if it is usually surrounded by quotation marks, the title should be bold but the quotation marks should not Las Meninas  Spanish for The Maids of Honour  is a 1656 painting by Diego Velzquez ,  ...  Yesterday  is a pop song originally recorded by The Beatles for their 1965 album Help . If the subject of the page has a common abbreviation or more than one name, the abbreviation in parentheses and each additional name should be in boldface on its first appearance Sodium hydroxide  Na OH , also known as lye , caustic soda and incorrectly, according to IUPAC nomenclature sodium hydrate , is  ... Use as few links as possible before and in the bolded title. Thereafter, words used in a title may be linked to provide more detail Arugam Bay is a bay situated on the Indian Ocean in the dry zone of Sri Lanka s southeast coast. The rest of the opening paragraph Then proceed with a description. Remember, the basic significance of a topic may not be obvious to nonspecialist readers, even if they understand the basic characterization or definition. Tell them. For instance Peer review , known as refereeing in some academic fields, is a scholarly process used in the publication of manuscripts and in the awarding of money for research. Publishers and agencies use peer review to select and to screen submissions. At the same time, the process assists authors in meeting the standards of their discipline. Publications and awards that have not undergone peer review are liable to be reg arded with suspicion by scholars and professionals in many fields. The rest of the lead section If the article is long enough for the lead section to contain several paragraphs, then the first paragraph should be short and to the point, with a clear explanation of what the subject of the page is. The following paragraphs should give a summary of the article. They should provide an overview of the main points the article will make, summarizing the primary reasons the subje ct matter is interesting or notable, including its more important controversies, if there are any. The appropriate length of the lead section depends on the total length of the article. As a general guideline Article Length Lead Length Fewer than 15,000 characters One or two paragraphs 15,00030,000 characters Two or three paragraphs More than 30,000 characters Three or four paragraphs Lead follows body Shortcut WPLEADFOLLOWSBODY The sequence in which you edit should usually be first change the body, then update the lead to summarize the body. Several editors might add or improve some information in the body of the article, and then another editor might update the lead once the new information has stabilized. Dont try to update the lead first, hoping to provide direction for future changes to the body . There are three reasons why editing the body first and then making the lead reflect it tends to lead to better articles. First, it keeps the lead in sync with the body. The lead, being a summary of the article, promises that the body will deliver fuller treatment of each point. Generally, wiki pages are imperfect at all times, but they should be complete, useful articles at all times. They should not contain under construction sections or refer to features and information that editors hope they will contain in the future. Its much worse for the lead to promise information that the body does not deliver than for the body to deliver information that the lead does not promise. Second, good ways to summarize material usually only become clear after that material has been written. If you add a new point to the lead before its covered in the body, you only think you know what the body will eventually contain. When the material is actually covered in the body, and checked and improved, usually by multiple editors, then you know. If having a rough, tentative summary helps you write the body, keep your own private summary, either on your computer or in your User space. Third, on contentious pages, people often get into edit wars over the lead because the lead is the most prominent part of the article. Its much harder to argue constructively over high-level statements when you dont share common understanding of the lower-level information that they summarize. Space is scarce in the lead, so people are tempted to cram too much into one senten ce, or pile on lots of references, in order to fully state and prove their caseresulting in an unreadable lead. In the body, you have all the space you need to cover subtleties and to cover opposing ideas fairly and in depth, separately, one at a time. Once the opposing ideas have been shaken out and covered well in the body, editing the lead without warring often becomes much easier. Instead of arguing about what is true or what all the competing sources say, now you are just arguing over whether the lead fairly summarizes whats currently in the body. Use other languages sparingly Main page WikipediaManual of Style   Foreign terms It is fine to include foreign terms as extra information, but avoid writing articles that can only be understood if the reader understands the foreign terms. Such words are equivalent to jargon , which should be explained somehow. In the English-language Wikipedia, the English form does not always have to come first sometimes the non-English word is better as the main text, with the English in parentheses or set off by commas after it, and sometimes not. For example, see Perestroika . Shortcut WPNONENGLISHTITLE Non-English words in the English-language Wikipedia should be written in italics . Non-English words should be used as titles for entries only as a last resort . Again, see Perestroika . English title terms taken from a language that does not use the Roman alphabet can include the native spelling in parentheses. See, for example, I Ching  simplified Chinese    traditional Chinese    pinyin  Yjng  or Sophocles  Greek   . The native spelling is useful for precisely identifying foreign words, since transliterations may be inaccurate or ambiguous. Foreign terms within the article body do not need native spellings if they can be specified as title terms in separate articles just link to the appropriate article on first occurrence. Use color sparingly See also HelpUsing colors If possible, avoid presenting information with color only within the articles text and in tables. Color should only be used sparingly, as a secondary visual aid. Computers and browsers vary, and you cannot know how much color, if any, is visible on the recipients machine. Wikipedia is international colors have different meaning in different cultures. Too many colors on one page look cluttered and unencyclopedic. Specifically, use the color red only for alerts and warnings . Awareness of color should be allowed for low-vision viewers poor lighting, color blindness, dark or overbright screens, and the wrong contrastcolor settings on the display screen. Use clear, precise and accurate terms Be concise Main page WPBECONCISE Shortcut WPTERSE Articles should use only necessary words. This does not mean using fewer words is always better rather, when considering equivalent expressions, choose the more concise. .mw-parser-output .templatequoteoverflowhiddenmargin1em 0padding0 40px.mw-parser-output .templatequote .templatequoteciteline-height1.5emtext-alignleftpadding-left1.6emmargin-top0 Vigorous writing is concise. A sentence should contain no unnecessary words, a paragraph no unnecessary sentences, for the same reason that a drawing should have no unnecessary lines and a machine no unnecessary parts. This requires not that the writer make all his sentences short, or that he avoid all detail and treat his subjects only in outline, but that every word tell.  William Strunk, Jr. from the 1918 work, The Elements of Style Reduce sentences to the essentials. Wordiness does not add credibility to Wikipedia articles. Avoid temporary expressions like due to the fact that in place of because, or at the present time for currently. The ideal method of specifying on-going events is as of 2019. Wikipedia grammar bots will replace these types of expressions with correct wording. Conciseness does not justify removing information from an article. The use of subjective qualifiers should be avoided. Principle of least astonishment For the principle of least astonishment as applied to potentially offensive content, see WPOffensive material . Shortcuts WPLEAST WPASTONISH WPSURPRISE When the principle of least astonishment is successfully employed, information is understood by the reader without struggle. The average reader should not be shocked, surprised, or confused by what they read. Do not use provocative language. Instead, offer information gently. Use consistent vocabulary in parts that are technical and difficult. To work out which parts of the sentence are going to be difficult for the reader, try to put yourself in the position of a reader hitherto uninformed on the subject. You should plan your page structure and links so that everything appears reasonable and makes sense. Try to avoid Easter egg links . A link should not take readers to somewhere other than where they thought it would go. Similarly, make sure that concepts being used as the basis for further discussion have already been defined or linked to a proper article. Explain causes before consequences and make sure your logical sequence is clear and sound, especially to the layperson . Ensure that redirects and hatnotes that are likely to be useful are in place. If a user wants to know about the branch of a well-known international hotel chain in the French capital, they may type Paris Hilton into the search box. This will, of course, take them to the page associated with a well-known socialite . Luckily, though, a hatnote at the top of that article exists in order to point our user to an article which they will find more useful. Use of refers to See also WikipediaWikipedia is not a dictionary   Fixing the introductory sentence removing refers to , and WikipediaManual of StyleLead section   First sentence Shortcuts WPREFERS WPUMD Phrases such as refers to , is the name of , describes the , or is a term for are sometimes used inappropriately in the first sentence of Wikipedia articles. For example, the article Computer architecture once began with the sentence,  Computer architecture refers to the theory behind the design of a computer. That is not true Computer architecture is the theory. The words computer architecture refer to the theory, but the article is not about the words it is about the theory. Thus it is better to say,  Computer architecture is the theory behind the design of a computer. This is known as the usemention distinction . For the vast majority of articles, the introduction is using a term Computer architecture is a theory, rather than mentioning it. Disambiguation pages mention the term, so in such cases it is correct to write  Great Schism may refer to either of two schisms in the history of Christianity .... However, a content article should read There have been two Great Schisms in the history of Christianity. When referring directly to a term rather than using it, write the word in italics, as shown above see WPWORDSASWORDS . Check your facts See also WikipediaVerifiability Shortcuts WPCheck your facts WPFACTCHECK Write material that is true check your facts. Do not write material that is false. This might require that you verify your alleged facts. This is a crucial part of citing good sources  even if you think you know something, you have to provide references anyway to prove to the reader that the fact is true. Material that seems to naturally stem from sourced claims might not have been actually claimed. In searching for good references to cite, you might even learn something new. Be careful about deleting material that may be factual. If you are inclined to delete something from an entry, first consider checking whether it is true. If material is apparently factual, in other words substantiated and cited, be extra careful about deleting. An encyclopedia is a collection of facts. If another editor provided a fact, there was probably a reason for it that should not be overlooked. Therefore, consider each fact provided as potentially precious. Is the context or overall presentation the issue If the fact does not belong i n one particular article, maybe it belongs in another. Examine entries you have worked on subsequent to revision by others. Have facts been omitted or deleted It may be the case that you failed to provide sufficient substantiation for the facts, or that the facts you incorporated may need a clearer relationship to the entry. Protect your facts, but also be sure that they are presented meaningfully. Check your fiction Shortcut WPCYF Main page WikipediaManual of Style writing about fiction The advice about factual articles also applies to articles on fiction subjects. Further considerations apply when writing about fictional topics because they are inherently not real . It is important to keep these articles verifiable and encyclopedic. If you add fictional information, clearly distinguish fact and fiction. As with normal articles, establish context so that a reader unfamiliar with the subject can get an idea about the articles meaning without having to check several links. Instead of writing  Trillian is Arthur Dent s girlfriend. She was taken away from Earth by Zaphod when he met her at a party. She meets Dent while travelling with Zaphod. write  Trillian is a fictional character from Douglas Adams  radio, book and now film series The Hitchhikers Guide to the Galaxy . In the first book, Trillian is introduced to the main character Arthur Dent on a spaceship. In her backstory, she was taken away from Earth when the space alien Zaphod Beeblebrox met her at a party. Use of fictional tenses Shortcut WPFICTENSE Works of fiction are generally considered to come alive for their audience. They therefore exist in a kind of perpetual present, regardless of when the fictional action is supposed to take place relative to the readers now. Thus, generally you should write about fiction using the historical present tense , not the past tense. See WPManual of Style   Verb tense and WPManual of StyleWriting about fiction   Contextual presentation . Examples Homer presents , Achilles rages , Andromache laments , Priam pleads . Holden Caulfield has a certain disdain for what he sees as phony.  Friends is an American sitcom that was aired on NBC. Conversely, discussion of history is usually written in the past tense and thus fictional history may be presented in that way as well. Chroniclers claimed that Thalestris, queen of the Amazons, seduced Alexander the Great. Articles about fictional topics should not read like book reports  instead, they should explain the topics significance to the work. After reading the article, the reader should be able to understand why a character, place, or event was included in the fictional work. Editors are generally discouraged from adding fictional information from sources that cannot be verified or are limited to a very small number of readers, such as fan fiction and online role-playing games. In the latter case, if you absolutely have to write about the subject, please be especially careful to cite your sources. If the subject, say a character in a television show, is too limited to be given a full article, then integrate information about that character into a larger article. It is better to write a larger article about the television show or a fictional universe itself than to create all sorts of stubs about its characters that nobody can find. Stay on topic WPTOPIC redirects here. For information about the Topic namespace, see WikipediaFlow . Shortcuts WPTOPIC WPOFFTOPIC The most readable articles contain no irrelevant nor only loosely relevant information. While writing an article, you might find yourself digressing into a side subject. If you are wandering off-topic, consider placing the additional information into a different article, where it will fit more closely with that topic. If you provide a link to the other article, readers who ar e interested in the side topic have the option of digging into it, but readers who are not interested will not be distracted by it. Due to the way in which Wikipedia has grown, many articles contain redundant passages of this kind. Please be bold in merging these passages. Pay attention to spelling Main page WikipediaSpellchecking Pay attention to spelling , particularly of new page names. Articles with good spelling and proper grammar can help encourage further contributions of well-formed content. Proper spelling of an article name will also make it easier for other authors to link their articles to your article. Sloppiness begets sloppiness, so always do your best. Browsers have the native ability to highlight misspelled words in text boxes. Use free online dictionaries like Ask Oxford , Dictionary.com , Onelook.com , Google Define and a spell checker such as SpellCheck.net , GingerSoftware , or your browsers built-in spell checker. See WikipediaTypo Team for tips on how to use these resources. Articles may also be spell-checked in a word processor before being saved. A free word processor may be obtained from OpenOffice.org or LibreOffice.org . A draft message on certain free email websites, such as Gmail , can also provide spell-check. This might be convenient, especially regarding email websites with which you are already familiar and use often. Avoid peacock and weasel terms Avoid peacock terms that show off the subject of the article without containing any real information. Similarly, avoid weasel words that offer an opinion without really backing it up, and which are really used to express a non-neutral point of view. Examples of peacock terms an important... one of the most prestigious... one of the best... the most influential... a significant... the great... Examples of weasel words Some people say... ...is widely regarded as... ..is widely considered... ...has been called... It is believed that... It has been suggestednoticeddecided... Some people believe... It has been said that... Some would say... Legend has it that... Critics say that... Manysome have claimed... Believe in your subject. Let the facts speak for themselves. If your ice hockey player, canton , or species of beetle is worth the readers time, it will come out through the facts. However, in some cases for example, history of graphic design using superlative adjectives in the ... one of the most important figures in the history of ... format in the description may help readers with no previous knowledge about the subject to learn about the importance or generally perceived status of the subject discussed. Note that to use this type of superlative adjective format, the most reputable experts in the relevant field must support the claim. Avoid blanket terms unless you have verified them. For example, this article states that of the 18 Montgomery Counties in the United States, most are named after Richard Montgomery. This is a blanket statement. It may very well be true, but is it reliable In this instance, the editor had done the research to verify this. Without the research, the statement should not be made. It is always a good idea to describe the research done and sign it on the articles talk page. If you wish to, or must refer to an opinion, first make sure someone who holds some standing in that subject gives it. A view on former American President Gerald Ford from Henry Kissinger is more interesting for the reader than one from your teacher from school. Then say who holds the opinion being given, preferably with a source or a quote for it. Compare the following Some critics of George W. Bush have said he has low intelligence. Author Michael Moore in his book Stupid White Men ...and Other Sorry Excuses for the State of the Nation wrote an open letter to George Bush. In it, he asked, George, are you able to read and write on an adult level Examples Sometimes the way around using these terms is to replace the statements with the facts that back them up. Instead of The Yankees are one of the greatest baseball teams in history. Write The New York Yankees have won 26 World Series championshipsalmost three times as many as any other team. By sticking to concrete and factual information, we can avoid the need to give any opinion at all. Doing so also makes for writing that is much more interesting, for example William Peckenridge, eighth Duke of Omnium 1642  May 8, 1691 is widely considered to be one of the most important men to carry that title. William Peckenridge, eighth Duke of Omnium 1642  May 8, 1691 was personal counselor to King James I , general in the Wars of the Roses , a chemist, bandleader, and the director of the secret society known as The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen . He expanded the title of Omnium to include protectorship of Guiana and right of revocation for civil-service appointments in India. Show, dont tell . The first example simply tells the reader that William Peckenridge was important. The second example shows the reader why he was important. Exceptions When repeating established views, it may be easier to simply state Before Nicolaus Copernicus , most people thought the sun revolved round the earth, rather than sacrifice clarity with details and sources, particularly if the statement forms only a small part of your article. However, in general, everything should be sourced , whether within the text, with a footnote, or with a general reference. Make omissions explicit for other editors Make omissions explicit when creating or editing an article. When writing an article, always aim for completeness. If for some reason you cannot cover a point that should be explained, make that omission explicit . You can do this either by leaving a note on the discussion page or by leaving HTML comments within the text and adding a notice to the bottom about the omissions. This has two purposes it entices others to contribute, and it alerts non-experts that the article they are reading does not yet give the full story. Thats why Wikipedia is a collaborative encyclopediawe work together to achieve what we could not achieve individually. Every aspect that you cover means less work for someone else, plus you may cover something that someone else may not think of but which is nevertheless important to the subject. Add  todo  to the top of the talk page of articles for which you can establish some goals, priorities or things to do. Other issues Honorifics   Do not use honorifics or titles , such as Mr, Ms, Rev, Doctor, etc. See WikipediaNaming conventions royalty and nobility and WikipediaManual of StyleBiography Inappropriate subjects   If you are trying to dress up something that doesnt belong in Wikipediayour band, your Web site, your companys productthink twice about it. Wikipedia is not an advertising medium or home page service . Wikipedians are pretty clever, and if an article is really just personal gratification or blatant advertising , its not going to last longno matter how  important  you say the subject is. Integrate changes When you make a change to some text, rather than appending the new text you would like to see included at the bottom of the page, if you feel so motivated, please place and edit your comments so that they flow seamlessly with the present text. Wikipedia articles should not end up being a series of disjointed comments about a subject, but unified, seamless, and ever-expanding ex positions of the subject. Avoiding common mistakes   It is easy to commit a Wikipedia faux pas . That is OKeverybody does it Nevertheless, here are a few you might try to avoid . Make a personal copy   Suppose you get into an edit war . Or worse, a revert war. Therefore, you try to stay cool . This is good. Congratulations However, what would be great is if you could carry on working on the article, even though there is an edit war going on, and even though the version on the top is the evil one favored by the other side in the dispute. So, make a temporary personal copy as a subpage of your user page. Just start a new page at SpecialMyPageArticle name it can be renamed in the URL address to start a page with a different article name, and copy and paste the wiki-source in there. Then you can carry on improving the article at your own pace If you like, drop a note on the appropriate talk page to let people know what you are doing. Some time later, at your leisure, once the fuss has died down, merge your improvements back in to the article proper. Maybe the other person has left Wikipedia, finding it not to their taste. Maybe they have gone on to other projects. Maybe they have changed their mind. Maybe someone else has made similar edits anyway although they may not be as good as yours, as you have had more time to consider the matter. Alternate versions of pages should be deleted once you are finished with them. See also WikipediaArticle development WikipediaBasic copyediting WikipediaHow to streamline a plot summary WikipediaMake technical articles understandable WikipediaPrinciple of some astonishment WikipediaPeer review , where experienced editors carefully go through an article, significantly helping it toward Good or Featured article status  Common issues seen in Peer review  from The Signpost , the online newspaper covering the English Wikipedia and the Wikimedia movement Amy Schade February 11, 2018. Inverted Pyramid Writing for Comprehension . Topic Writing for the Web . Nielsen Norman Group . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em Notes  Number of characters may be checked by selecting the View History tab for the page, then Page Statistics from the line near the top headed External Tools. Number of characters is listed on the right under the Prose column.  Rhetorical questions can occasionally be used, when appropriate, in the presentation of material, but only when the question is asked by the material under consideration, not being asked in Wikipedias own voice. Example here .  For an example found in, and removed from, a high-profile article, see here .  For example Amalie Emmy Noether nt 23 March 1882  14 April 1935 was a German mathematician known for her groundbreaking contributions to abstract algebra and her contributions to theoretical physics . This example not only tells the reader that the subject was a mathematician, it also indicates her field of expertise and work she did outside of it. The years of her birth and death provide time context. The reader who goes no further in this article already knows when she lived, what work she did, and why she is notable.  WikipediaManual of Style biographies has more on the specific format for biography articles.  For example This Manual of Style is a style guide containing  ... not This style guide , known as the Manual of Style , contains  ...  For example, in the article  United Kingdom  The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland , commonly known as the United Kingdom , the UK , or Britain , is a sovereign island country located off the northwestern coast of continental Europe .  Thus, the article Egg food should start like this An egg is an ovum produced by  ... Not like this An egg food is an ovum produced by  ...  When writing definitional material, remember that Wikipedia is not a dictionary . We do not do one-liner entries here, and the lead section does not contain notes about whether something in a noun, etc. The purpose of an encyclopedic definition is not to just inform the reader of the basic meaning of term, but to explain the import of the subject contextually. If a reader leaves the article after only reading the lead section, they should come away with a deeper sense of the meaning than they would get from a dictionary entry.  For example, instead of A trusted third party is an entity that facilitates interactions between two parties who both trust the third party. write In cryptography , a trusted third party is an entity that facilitates interactions between two parties who both trust the third party.  For example Homer Simpson is a fictional character in The Simpsons . v t e Writing guides Starting an article Getting started Layout Visual structure of articles The perfect article A checklist of components Article development Suggested stages of an article Manual of Style Comprehensive style guide Writing better articles A collection of advice v t e Wikipedia help pages Visit the Teahouse if you are a new editor looking for interactive help, or the Help desk for an interactive Q  A forum. FAQs    Reference desks    Noticeboards    Missing Manual    Cheatsheet    Directories    About Wikipedia Administration Purpose Principles Wikipedia in brief Policies and guidelines What Wikipedia is not Disclaimer   parental advice  Making requests where to ask questions contact Wikipedia directly Who writes Wikipedia Why create an account Help for readers FAQ Books Copyright Glossary Mobile access Navigation Other languages Searching Students Viewing media Contributing to Wikipedia A plain and simple overview A primer for newcomers Advice for young editors Avoiding common mistakes Etiquette   community expectations  Learning the ropes Instructional material Simplified Manual of Style Simplified rule-set Ignore all rules The rules are principles Style-tips Tip of the day Task Center Your first article   article wizard  Vandalism Getting started Wikipedia intro Wikipedia tutorial The Wikipedia Adventure Manual of Style intro Graphics tutorials Picture tutorial  Uploading intro  IRC live chat tutorial Navigating intro Policies intro Referencing intro Tables intro Talk pages intro VisualEditor user guide Dos and donts Accessibility Bios Categorization Disambiguation Images Links Lists References Tables Talks How-to pages and information pages Appealing blocks Article deletion Categories Citations   references Referencing for beginners Citation Style 1 Cite errors References and page numbers Convert Diff Editing toolbar edit conflict Email confirmation Find sources Files Footnotes Image deletion Infoboxes Linking   link color  Logging in Merging Namespaces Page name Redirect Renaming pages Passwords Reverting Talk pages   archiving  URL User contributions User page design center Coding wiki markup Wiki markup Barcharts Calculations Characters Citation templates Columns Hidden text HTML Lists Magic words   introduction  Music symbols Sections Sounds Tables   introduction  Templates documentation messages cleanup messages Transclusion Visual files Wiki tools Directories Abbreviations Departments Editors index Essays FAQs Glossary Guidelines Help menu Manual of Style Policies Shortcuts Tasks Tips Ask for help on your talk page v t e Essays on building Wikipedia Philosophy Articles must be written Avoid vague introductions Be a reliable source Cohesion Concede lost arguments Dissent is not disloyalty Editors will sometimes be wrong Eight simple rules for editing our encyclopedia Explanationism Here to build an encyclopedia Not editing because of Wikipedia restriction Paradoxes Paraphrasing POV and OR from editors, sources, and fields Product, process, policy Purpose Systemic bias Reasonability rule The role of policies in collaborative anarchy The rules are principles Ten Simple Rules for Editing Wikipedia Tendentious editing Trifecta Wikipedia in brief Wikipedia is a community Wikipedia is an encyclopedia Construction 100K featured articles A navbox on every page Advanced article editing Advanced table formatting Advanced template coding Advanced text formatting Alternatives to the Expand template Amnesia test An unfinished house is a real problem Autosizing images Avoid mission statements Bare URLs Be neutral in form Beef up that first revision Cherrypicking Citation overkill Concept cloud Creating controversial content Criticisms of society may be consistent with NPOV and reliability The deadline is now Dictionaries as sources Dont demolish the house while its still being built Dont get hung up on minor details Dont hope the house will build itself Dont panic Editing on mobile devices Editors are not mindreaders Encourage the newcomers Endorsements commercial Featured articles may have problems Give an article a chance How to run an edit-a-thon Inaccuracies in Wikipedia namespace Inaccuracy Law sources Link rot Minors and persons judged incompetent Murder of articles Not every storyeventdisaster needs a biography Not everything needs a navbox Not everything needs a WikiProject Nothing is in stone Permastub Potential, not just current state Printability Publicists Put a little effort into it Restoring part of a reverted edit Robotic editing Sham consensus Temporary versions of articles There is a deadline Walled garden What an article should not include Wikipedia is a work in progress Wikipedia is not being written in an organized fashion The world will not end tomorrow Writing Gender-neutral language Use feminine pronouns Write the article first Writing about women Writing better articles Deletion Adjectives in your recommendations AfD is not a war zone Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions Arguments to avoid in deletion reviews Arguments to avoid in image deletion discussions Arguments to make in deletion discussions Avoid repeated arguments Before commenting in a deletion discussion Content removal Delete the junk Does deletion help Dont overuse shortcuts to policy and guidelines to win your argument Follow the leader How to save an article proposed for deletion I just dont like it Immunity Identifying blatant advertising Identifying test edits Liar Liar Pants on Fire Nothing Overzealous deletion Relisting can be abusive What to do if your article gets tagged for speedy deletion Why was the page I created deleted Wikipedia is not Whack-A-Mole About essays Avoid writing redundant essays Difference between policies, guidelines and essays Dont cite essays as if they were policy Finding an essay Quote your own essay Value of essays Related subjects About policies and guidelines Guidelines Policies Wikipedia is a volunteer service Essay directory Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleWikipediaWriting_better_articles oldid912579878Provide_context_for_the_reader  Categories  Wikipedia supplemental pages Wikipedia how-to Wikipedia essays about building the encyclopedia Wikipedia editor help Wikipedia essays about editing Wikipedia page help Hidden categories Wikipedia semi-protected project pages