Nitrile rubber From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search This article needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources   Nitrile rubber     news    newspapers    books    scholar    JSTOR  March 2008   Learn how and when to remove this template message  Nitrile rubber Identifiers CAS Number 9003-18-3   Y ChemSpider None ECHA InfoCard 100.107.385 Except where otherwise noted, data are given for materials in their standard state at 25  C 77  F, 100  kPa. N   verify   what is   Y N   Infobox  references Nitrile rubber , also known as NBR , Buna-N , and acrylonitrile butadiene rubber , is a synthetic rubber copolymer of acrylonitrile ACN and butadiene . Trade names include Perbunan , Nipol , Krynac and Europrene . Nitrile butadiene rubber  NBR  is a family of unsaturated copolymers of 2-propenenitrile and various butadiene monomers  1,2-butadiene and 1,3-butadiene . Although its physical and chemical properties vary depending on the polymers composition of nitrile , this form of synthetic rubber is unusual in being generally resistant to oil, fuel, and other chemicals the more nitrile within the polymer, the higher the resistance to oils but the lower the flexibility of the material. It is used in the automotive and aeronautical industry to make fuel and oil handling hoses , seals, grommets, and self-sealing fuel tanks , since ordinary rubbers cannot be used. 1  It is used in the nuclear industry to make protective gloves. NBRs ability to withstand a range of temperatures from 40 to 108  C 40 to 226  F makes it an ideal material for aeronautical applications. Nitrile butadiene is also used to create moulded goods, footwear, adhesives, sealants, sponges, expanded foams, and floor mats. Its resilience makes NBR a useful material for disposable lab, cleaning, and examination gloves. Nitrile rubber is more resistant than natural rubber to oils and acids , and has superior strength, but has inferior flexibility. Nitrile gloves are therefore more puncture-resistant than natural rubber gloves, especially if the latter are degraded by exposure to chemicals or ozone .  citation needed  Nitrile rubber is less likely to cause an allergic reaction than natural rubber.  citation needed  Nitrile rubber is generally resistant to aliphatic hydrocarbons . Nitrile, like natural rubber, can be attacked by ozone , ketones , esters and aldehydes .  citation needed  Contents 1 Production 2 Properties 3 Applications 3.1 Nitric acid 4 Hydrogenated nitrile butadiene rubber HNBR 5 Carboxylated nitrile butadiene rubber XNBR 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Production  edit  Krynac 33110 F nitrile rubber bales Emulsifier soap, 2-propenenitrile, various butadiene monomers including 1,3-butadiene, 1,2-butadiene , radical generating activators, and a catalyst are added to polymerization vessels in the production of hot NBR. Water serves as the reaction medium within the vessel. The tanks are heated to 3040  C to facilitate the polymerization reaction and to promote branch formation in the polymer. Because several monomers capable of propagating the reaction are involved in the production of nitrile rubber the composition of each polymer can vary depending on the concentrations of each monomer added to the polymerization tank and the conditions within the tank. One repeating un it found throughout the entire polymer may not exist. For this reason there is also no IUPAC name for the general polymer. The reaction for one possible portion of the polymer is shown below 1,3-butadiene  1,3-butadiene  2-propenenitrile  1,3-butadiene  1,2-butadiene  nitrile butadiene rubber Monomers are usually permitted to react for 5 to 12 hours. Polymerization is allowed to proceed to 70 conversion before a shortstop agent such as dimethyldithiocarbamate and diethyl hydroxylamine is added to react with the remaining free radicals. Once the resultant latex has shortstopped, the unreacted monomers are removed through a steam in a slurry stripper. Recovery of unreacted monomers is close to 100. After monomer recovery, latex is sent through a series of filters to remove unwanted solids and then sent to the blending tanks wh ere it is stabilized with an antioxidant . The yielded polymer latex is coagulated using calcium nitrate , aluminium sulfate , and other coagulating agents in an aluminium tank. The coagulated substance is then washed and dried into crumb rubber. The process for the production of cold NBR is very similar to that of hot NBR. Polymerization tanks are heated to 5 15  C instead of 30 40  C. Under lower temperature conditions, less branching will form on polymers the amount of branching distinguishes cold NBR from hot NBR. Properties  edit  The raw material is yellow, though it can be orange or red tinted, depending on the manufacturer. Its elongation at break is  300 and possesses a tensile strength of  10 Nmm 2 10 MPa. NBR has good resistance to mineral oils, vegetable oils, benzenepetrol, ordinary diluted acids and alkalines. 2  An important factor in the properties of NBR is the ratio of acrylonitrile groups to butadiene groups in the polymer backbone, referred to as the ACN content. The lower the ACN content, the lower the glass transition temperature however, the higher the ACN content, the better resistance the polymer will have to nonpolar solvents as mentioned above. 3  Most applications requiring both solvent resistance and low temperature flexibility require an ACN content of 33. Property Value Appearance Hardness, Shore A 3090 Tensile failure stress, ultimate 500-2500 PSI Elongation after fracture in   600 Maximum Density Can be compounded around 1.00  gcm 3 Applications  edit  A disposable nitrile rubber glove. The uses of nitrile rubber include disposable non-latex gloves , automotive transmission belts, hoses , O-rings , gaskets , oil seals, V belts, synthetic leather, printers form rollers, and as cable jacketing NBR latex can also be used in the preparation of adhesives and as a pigment binder. Unlike polymers meant for ingestion, where small inconsistencies in chemical compositionstructure can have a pronounced effect on the body, the general properties of NBR are not altered by minor structuralcompositional differences. The production process itself is not overly complex the polymerization, monomer recovery, and coagulation processes require some additives and eq uipment, but they are typical of the production of most rubbers. The necessary apparatus is simple and easy to obtain. For these reasons, the substance is widely produced in poorer countries where labor is relatively cheap. Among the highest producers of NBR are mainland China and Taiwan. In January 2008, the European Commission imposed fines totaling  34,230,000 on the Bayer and Zeon groups for fixing prices for nitrile butadiene rubber, in violation of the EU ban on cartels and restrictive business practices Article 81 of the EC Treaty and Article 53 of the EEA Agreement. 4  Nitric acid  edit  Nitric acid penetrates nitrile gloves in a few minutes. 5  Hydrogenated nitrile butadiene rubber HNBR  edit  Hydrogenated nitrile butadiene rubber HNBR, also known as highly saturated nitrile HSN, is widely known for its physical strength and retention of properties after long-term exposure to heat, oil and chemicals. Trade names include Zhanber Lianda Corporation, Therban Arlanxeo 6   and Zetpol Zeon Chemical. It is commonly used to manufacture O-rings for automotive air-conditioning systems. 7  Depending on filler selection and loading, HNBR compounds typically have tensile strengths of 2031  MPa when measured at 23  C. Compounding techniques allow for HNBR to be used over a broad temperature range, 40  C to 165  C, with minimal degradation over long periods of time. For low-temperature performance, low ACN grades should be used high-temperature performance can be obtained by using highly saturated HNBR grades with white fillers. As a group, HNBR elastomers have excellent resistance to common automotive fluids e.g., engine oil, coolant, fuel, etc. and many industrial chemicals. Lik e NBR, fluid and chemical resistance improves as the ACN content is increased.  citation needed  The unique properties and higher temperature rating attributed to HNBR when compared to NBR has resulted in wide adoption of HNBR in automotive, industrial, and assorted, performance-demanding applications. On a volume basis, the automotive market is the largest consumer, using HNBR for a host of dynamic and static seals, hoses, and belts. HNBR has also been widely employed in industrial sealing for oil field exploration and processing, as well as rolls for steel and paper mills. Carboxylated nitrile butadiene rubber XNBR  edit  An improved version of nitrile butadiene rubber NBR is carboxylated nitrile butadiene rubber XNBR. In this execution there are beside the sulfur bridges also carboxyl groups R-COO- on the double bond of the butadiene part. These groups will make ionic cross links with zinc Zn 2  to give improved physical properties as compared to a non-carboxylated nitrile rubber. These ionic crosslinks are formed along with sulfur links. The carboxyl groups which are needed for these extra links are distributed randomly and are present at levels of 10 or less. See also  edit  Medical glove Monowitz Buna Werke Ozone cracking References  edit   Ceresana. Synthetic Rubber - Study Market, Analysis - Ceresana . www.ceresana.com . Archived from the original on 4 November 2017 . Retrieved 7 May 2018 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Nitrile NBR Rubber Material Specs . Exonic Polymers .  httpwww.iisrp.comwebpolymers07nbr-18feb2002.pdf  Simon Zekaria 23 January 2008. Bayer, Zeon fined 34.2 mln eur for synthetic rubber cartel activity . Forbes . AFX News .  httpschemistry.nd.eduassets159791nitric_acid.docx  THERBAN -The high-performance HNBR . www.therban.com . Archived from the original on 18 March 2018 . Retrieved 7 May 2018 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Archived copy . Archived from the original on 2012-03-28 . Retrieved 2012-05-28 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  CS1 maint archived copy as title  link  External links  edit  Manufacturing capabilities in Nitrile Rubber Nitrile Rubber Selection Guide Robinson Rubber Products Nitrile Rubber , AAA Acme Rubber Co Risk Assessment of Butadiene , CAS No. 106-99-0, EINECS No.203-450-8, June 2001 Existing Substances Evaluation Butadiene , The Green Lane, Environment Canada Antitrust Commission fines synthetic rubber producers  34.2 million for price fixing cartel , EUROPA Portal Information  Resource Site on Nitrile Gloves , Archived from the original on August 5, 2013 httpwww.klozure.comViewSolutionsPagepagematerials httpwww.iisrp.comWebPolymers03HNBR-11Dec2001.pdf v t e Rubber Chemical types Natural rubber Synthetic rubber Butyl rubber Styrene-butadiene Nitrile rubber Silicone rubber Chloroprene rubber EPDM rubber Mechanical types Foam rubber Micronized rubber powder Cold rubber Additives Polymer additive Plasticizer Polymer stabilizers Biodegradable additives Filler materials Rubber processing Rubber tapping Rubber technology Vulcanization Industry Rubber industry in Malaysia Rubber Industry Smallholders Development Authority Rubber Board Michelin Dunlop Bridgestone United States Rubber Company Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company Rubber Manufacturers Association List of tire companies CategoryRubber industry Products Tires Rubber mulch Rubberized asphalt Rubber band CategoryRubber products Waste Rubber pollution Great Pacific garbage patch Persistent organic pollutant Dioxins Environmental hazards Tire-derived fuel Rubber recycling Airfield rubber removal Tire codes Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleNitrile_rubber oldid908703961  Categories  Copolymers Elastomers U.S. Synthetic Rubber Program Hidden categories CS1 errors deprecated parameters CS1 maint archived copy as title Articles needing additional references from March 2008 All articles needing additional references Chemicals that do not have a ChemSpider ID assigned Chemicals without a PubChem CID Articles without InChI source Articles without EBI source Articles without KEGG source Articles without UNII source ECHA InfoCard ID from Wikidata Articles containing unverified chemical infoboxes Chembox image size set All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2013 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2014