Cost estimation in software engineering From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia    Redirected from Estimation in software engineering  Jump to navigation Jump to search This article needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources   Cost estimation in software engineering     news    newspapers    books    scholar    JSTOR  November 2011   Learn how and when to remove this template message  Cost estimation in software engineering is typically concerned with the financial spend on the effort to develop and test the software, this can also include requirements review, maintenance, training, managing and buying extra equipment, servers and software. Many methods have been developed for estimating software costs for a given project. Methods  edit  Methods for estimation in software engineering include these principles Analysis effort method Parametric Estimating The Planning Game from Extreme Programming  ITK method , also known as Method CETIN Proxy-based estimating PROBE from the Personal Software Process  Program Evaluation and Review Technique PERT Putnam_model , also known as SLIM PRICE Systems Founders of Commercial Parametric models that estimates the scope, cost, effort and schedule for software projects. SEER-SEM Parametric Estimation of Effort, Schedule, Cost, Risk. Minimum time and staffing concepts based on Brookss law The Use Case Points method UCP Weighted Micro Function Points WMFP Wideband Delphi Most cost software development estimation techniques involve estimating or measuring software size first and then applying some knowledge of historical of cost per unit of size. Software size is typically sized in SLOC , Function Point or Agile story points . See also  edit  Software development effort estimation Software metric Project management Cost overrun Risk Comparison of development estimation software External links  edit  Software Estimation chapter from OReilly, Applied Software Project Management Estimating With Use Case Points from Methods  Tools Definition of Use Case Points method UCP Roy K. Clemmons, Project Estimation With Use Case Points Estimating techniques throughout the SDLC COCOMO II This business term article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it . v t e Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleCost_estimation_in_software_engineering oldid903250598  Categories  Business term stubs Software engineering costs Hidden categories Articles needing additional references from November 2011 All articles needing additional references All stub articles