Obligation From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search An obligation is a course of action that someone is required to take, whether legal or moral . There are also obligations in other normative contexts, such as obligations of etiquette , social obligations, religious and possibly in terms of politics , where obligations are requirements which must be fulfilled. These are generally legal obligations, which can incur a penalty for non-fulfilment, although certain people are obliged to carry out certain actions for other reasons as well, whether as a tradition or for social reasons. Obligations vary from person to person for example, a person holding a political office will generally have far more obligations than an average adult citizen, who themselves will have more obligations than a child. 1  Obligations are generally granted in return for an increase in an individuals rights or power. For example, obligations for health and safety in a workplace from employer to employee maybe to ensure the fire exit is not blocked or ensure that the plugs are put in firmly. The word obligation can also designate a written obligation, or such things as bank notes, coins, checks, bonds, stamps, or securities. Contents 1 Other uses 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Other uses  edit  The term obligate can also be used in a biological context, in reference to species which must occupy a certain niche or behave in a certain way in order to survive. In biology, the opposite of obligate is facultative , meaning that a species is able to behave in a certain way and may do so under certain circumstances, but that it can also survive without having to behave this way. For example, species of salamanders in the family Proteidae are obligate paedomorphs , whereas species belonging to the Ambystomatidae are facultative paedomorphs. In the Catholic Church, Holy Days of Obligation or Holidays of Obligation, less commonly called Feasts of Precept, are the days on which, as canon 1247 of the Code of Canon Law states, the faithful are obliged to participate in the Mass . See also  edit  Convention Duty Law of obligations References  edit   Old Bear, Sacred Journey of the Medicine Wheel 2008, p. 393 Adults have more obligations and are held to higher standards of accountability than children are. External links  edit  Political Obligation . Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em This legal term article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it . v t e This article about ethics is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it . v t e Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleObligation oldid911849422  Categories  Philosophy of law Concepts in ethics Philosophy of life Legal terminology stubs Ethics stubs Hidden categories All stub articles