Enterprise Unified Process From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search The Enterprise Unified Process  EUP  is an extended variant of the Unified Process and was developed by Scott W. Ambler and Larry Constantine in 2000, eventually reworked in 2005 by Ambler, John Nalbone and Michael Vizdos . 1  EUP was originally introduced to overcome some shortages of RUP, namely the lack of production and eventual retirement of a software system. So two phases and several new disciplines were added. EUP sees software development not as a standalone activity, but embedded in the lifecycle of the system to be built or enhanced or replaced, the IT lifecycle of the enterprise and the organizationbusiness lifecycle of the enterprise itself. 2  It deals with software development as seen from the customers point of view. In 2013 work began to evolve EUP to be based on Disciplined Agile Delivery instead of the Unified Process. Contents 1 Phases 2 Disciplines 3 Best Practices of EUP 4 See also 5 References 6 Bibliography 7 External links Phases  edit  The Unified Process defines four project phases Inception Elaboration Construction Transition To these EUP adds two additional phases Production Retirement Disciplines  edit  The Rational Unified Process defines nine project disciplines Business Modeling Requirements Analysis and Design Implementation Test Deployment Configuration and Change Management Project Management Environment To these EUP adds one additional project discipline Operations and Support and seven enterprise disciplines Enterprise Business Modeling Portfolio Management Enterprise Architecture Strategic Reuse People Management Enterprise Administration Software Process Improvement Best Practices of EUP  edit  The EUP provide following best practices- Develop iteratively Manage requirements Proven architecture Modeling Continuously verify quality. Manage change Collaborative development Look beyond development. Deliver working software on a regular basis Manage risk See also  edit  Disciplined Agile Delivery Rational Unified Process Software development process Extreme programming References  edit   See Ramsin2008 and Ambler et al. 2005 for details on history of EUP  Ambler et al 2005 p.7 Bibliography  edit  Ambler, Scott W. Constantine, Larry L. 2000, The unified process inception phase best practices in implementing the UP , Focal Press, ISBN   978-1-929629-10-7 .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em Ambler, Scott W. Constantine, Larry L. 2000, The unified process elaboration phase best practices in implementing the UP , Focal Press, ISBN   978-1-929629-05-3 Ambler, Scott W. Constantine, Larry L. 2000, The unified process construction phase best practices for completing the unified process , Focal Press, ISBN   978-1-929629-01-5 Ambler, Scott W. Constantine, Larry L. 2002, The Unified process transition and production phase , Focal Press, ISBN   978-1-57820-092-4 Ambler, Scott W Nalbone, John Vizdos, Michael J 2005, The Enterprise Unified Process   extending the Rational Unified Process , Prentice Hall PTR, ISBN   978-0-13-191451-3 Ramsin, Raman 2008. Process-centered review of object oriented software development methodologies. ACM Computing Surveys . Association of Computing Machinery ACM. 40 1 189. doi  10.11451322432.1322435 . External links  edit  Scott W. Amblers website on the Enterprise Unified Process v t e Software engineering Fields Computer programming Requirements engineering Software deployment Software design Software maintenance Software testing Systems analysis Formal methods Concepts Data modeling Enterprise architecture Functional specification Modeling language Orthogonality Programming paradigm Software Software archaeology Software architecture Software configuration management Software development methodology Software development process Software quality Software quality assurance Software verification and validation Structured analysis Orientations Agile Aspect-oriented Object orientation Ontology Service orientation SDLC Models Developmental Agile EUP Executable UML Incremental model Iterative model Prototype model RAD UP Scrum Spiral model V-Model Waterfall model XP Other SPICE CMMI Data model ER model Function model Information model Metamodeling Object model Systems model View model Languages IDEF UML USL SysML Software engineers Victor Basili Kent Beck Grady Booch Fred Brooks Barry Boehm Peter Chen Danese Cooper Ward Cunningham Tom DeMarco Edsger W. Dijkstra Delores M. Etter Martin Fowler Adele Goldstine Margaret Hamilton C. A. R. Hoare Lois Haibt Mary Jean Harrold Grace Hopper Watts Humphrey Michael A. Jackson Ivar Jacobson Alan Kay Nancy Leveson Stephen J. Mellor Bertrand Meyer David Parnas Trygve Reenskaug Winston W. Royce James Rumbaugh Mary Shaw Peri Tarr Elaine Weyuker Niklaus Wirth Edward Yourdon Related fields Computer science Computer engineering Project management Risk management Systems engineering Category Commons Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleEnterprise_Unified_Process oldid875234292  Categories  Software development process Software project management