Propeller From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Device that transmits rotational power into linear thrust on a fluid For aircraft propellers, see Propeller aeronautics . For other uses, see Propeller disambiguation . Propeller on a merchant vessel. This propeller rotates clockwise when viewed from astern to propel the ship forward the person in the picture has his hand on the blades trailing edge. A propeller is a type of fan that transmits power by converting rotational motion into thrust . A pressure difference is produced between the forward and rear surfaces of the airfoil -shaped blades, and a fluid such as air or water is accelerated by the pressure difference. Propeller dynamics, like those of aircraft wings , can be modelled by Bernoullis principle and Newtons third law . Most marine propellers are screw propellers with helical blades rotating around an approximately horizontal axis or propeller shaft. Contents 1 History 1.1 Early developments 1.2 Screw propellers 1.3 Shaftless propellers 1.4 Aircraft propellers 2 Propeller theory 2.1 History 2.2 Theory of operation 2.3 Marine propeller cavitation 2.4 Forces acting on a foil 2.5 Propeller thrust Equation 2.5.1 Single blade 2.5.2 Thrust and torque 2.6 Actual performance 3 Types of marine propellers 3.1 Controllable-pitch propeller 3.2 Skewback propeller 3.3 Modular propeller 3.4 Voith Schneider propeller 4 Protection of small engines 5 Propeller variations 5.1 Cleaver 6 See also 6.1 Propeller characteristics 6.2 Propeller phenomena 6.3 Other 6.4 Materials and manufacture 7 Notes 8 External links History  edit  Early developments  edit  The principle employed in using a screw propeller is used in sculling . It is part of the skill of propelling a Venetian gondola but was used in a less refined way in other parts of Europe and probably elsewhere. For example, propelling a canoe with a single paddle using a pitch stroke or side slipping a canoe with a scull involves a similar technique. In China, sculling, called lu, was also used by the 3rd century AD. In sculling, a single blade is moved through an arc, from side to side taking care to keep presenting the blade to the water at the effective angle. The innovation introduced with the screw propeller was the extension of that arc through more than 360 by attaching the blade to a rotating shaft. Propellers can have a single blade , but in practice there are nearly always more than one so as to balance the forces involved. Archimedes screw The origin of the screw propeller starts with Archimedes , who used a screw to lift water for irrigation and bailing boats, so famously that it became known as Archimedes screw . It was probably an application of spiral movement in space spirals were a special study of Archimedes  to a hollow segmented water-wheel used for irrigation by Egyptians for centuries. Leonardo da Vinci adopted the principle to drive his theoretical helicopter, sketches of which involved a large canvas screw overhead. In 1661, Toogood and Hays proposed using screws for waterjet propulsion, though not as a propeller. 1  Robert Hooke in 1681 designed a horizontal watermill which was remarkably similar to the Kirsten-Boeing vertical axis propeller designed almost two and a half centuries later in 1928 two years later Hooke modified the design to provide motive power for ships through water. 2  In 1752, the Academie des Sciences in Paris granted Burnelli a prize for a design of a propeller-wheel. At about the same time, the French mathematician Alexis-Jean-Pierre Paucton, suggested a water propulsion system based on the Archimedean screw. 2   In 1771, steam-engine inventor James Watt in a private letter suggested using spiral oars to propel boats, although he did not use them with his steam engines, or ever implement the idea. 3  The first practical and applied use of a propeller on a submarine dubbed Turtle which was designed in New Haven, Connecticut, in 1775 by Yale student and inventor David Bushnell , with the help of the clock maker, engraver, and brass foundryman Isaac Doolittle , and with Bushnells brother Ezra Bushnell and ships carpenter and clock maker Phineas Pratt constructing the hull in Saybrook, Connecticut. 4  5  On the night of September 6, 1776, Sergeant Ezra Lee piloted Turtle in an attack on HMS Eagle in New York Harbor. 6  7  Turtle also has the distinction of being the first submarine used in battle. Bushnell later described the propeller in an October 1787 letter to Thomas Jefferson An oar formed upon the principle of the screw was fixed in the forepart of the vessel its axis entered the vessel and being turned one way rowed the vessel forward but being turned the other way rowed it backward. It was m ade to be turned by the hand or foot. 8  The brass propeller, like all the brass and moving parts on Turtle , was crafted by the ingenious mechanic Issac Doolittle of New Haven. 9  In 1785, Joseph Bramah in England proposed a propeller solution of a rod going through the underwater aft of a boat attached to a bladed propeller, though he never built it. 10  In 1802, Edward Shorter proposed using a similar propeller attached to a rod angled down temporarily deployed from the deck above the waterline and thus requiring no water seal, and intended only to assist becalmed sailing vessels. He tested it on the transport ship Doncaster in Gibraltar and at Malta, achieving a speed of 1.5  mph 2.4  kmh. 11  The lawyer and inventor John Stevens in the United States, built a 25-foot 7.6  m boat with a rotary stem engine coupled to a four-bladed propeller, achieving a speed of 4  mph 6.4  kmh, but he abandoned propellers due to the inherent danger in using the high-pressure steam engines, and instead built paddle-wheeled boats. 12  By 1827, Czech-Austrian inventor Josef Ressel had invented a screw propeller which had multiple blades fastened around a conical base. He had tested his propeller in February 1826 on a small ship that was manually driven. He was successful in using his bronze screw propeller on an adapted steamboat 1829. His ship, Civetta of 48 gross register tons , reached a speed of about 6 knots 11  kmh. This was the first ship successfully driven by an Archimedes screw-type propeller. After a new steam engine had an accident cracked pipe weld his experiments were banned by the Austro-Hungarian police as dangerous. Josef Ressel was at the time a forestry inspector for the Austrian Empire. But before this he received an Austro-Hungarian patent license for his propell er 1827. He died in 1857. This new method of propulsion was an improvement over the paddlewheel as it was not so affected by either ship motions or changes in draft as the vessel burned coal. 13  John Patch , a mariner in Yarmouth, Nova Scotia developed a two-bladed, fan-shaped propeller in 1832 and publicly demonstrated it in 1833, propelling a row boat across Yarmouth Harbour and a small coastal schooner at Saint John, New Brunswick , but his patent application in the United States was rejected until 1849 because he was not an American citizen. 14  His efficient design drew praise in American scientific circles 15  but by this time there were multiple competing versions of the marine propeller. Screw propellers  edit  Although there was much experimentation with screw propulsion until the 1830s, few of these inventions were pursued to the testing stage, and those that were proved unsatisfactory for one reason or another. 16  Propellers of RMS   Olympic , a sister ship to RMS   Titanic and HMHS   Britannic Smiths original 1836 patent for a screw propeller of two full turns. He would later revise the patent, reducing the length to one turn. In 1835, two inventors in Britain, John Ericsson and Francis Pettit Smith , began working separately on the problem. Smith was first to take out a screw propeller patent on 31 May, while Ericsson, a gifted Swedish engineer then working in Britain, filed his patent six weeks later. 17  Smith quickly built a small model boat to test his invention, which was demonstrated first on a pond at his Hendon farm, and later at the Royal Adelaide Gallery of Practical Science in London , where it was seen by the Secretary of the Navy, Sir William Barrow. Having secured the patronage of a London banker named Wright, Smith then built a 30-foot 9.1  m, 6- horsepower 4.5  kW canal boat of six tons burthen called Francis Smith , which was fitted with a wooden propeller of his own design and demonstrated on the Paddington Canal from November 1836 to September 1837. By a fortuitous accident, the wooden propeller of two turns was damaged during a voyage in February 1837, and to Smiths surprise the broken propeller, which now consisted of only a single turn, doubled the boats previous speed, from about four miles an hour to eight. 17  Smith would subsequently file a revised patent in keeping with this accidental discovery. In the meantime, Ericsson built a 45-foot 14  m screw-propelled steamboat, Francis B. Ogden in 1837, and demonstrated his boat on the River Thames to senior members of the British Admiralty , including Surveyor of the Navy Sir William Symonds . In spite of the boat achieving a speed of 10 miles an hour, comparable with that of existing paddle steamers , Symonds and his entourage were unimpressed. The Admiralty maintained the view that screw propulsion would be ineffective in ocean-going service, while Symonds himself believed that screw propelled ships could not be steered efficiently. 18  Following this rejection, Ericsson built a second, larger screw-propelled boat, Robert F. Stockton , and had her sailed in 1839 to the United States, where he was soon to gain fame as the designer of the U.S. Navy s first screw-propelled warship, USS   Princeton . 19  Screw propeller of SS   Archimedes Apparently aware of the Royal Navys view that screw propellers would prove unsuitable for seagoing service, Smith determined to prove this assumption wrong. In September 1837, he took his small vessel now fitted with an iron propeller of a single turn to sea, steaming from Blackwall, London to Hythe, Kent , with stops at Ramsgate , Dover and Folkestone . On the way back to London on the 25th, Smiths craft was observed making headway in stormy seas by officers of the Royal Navy. The Admiraltys interest in the technology was revived, and Smith was encouraged to build a full size ship to more conclusively demonstrate the technologys effectiveness. 20  A replica of SS   Great Britain s first propeller was created for this museum ship. The real propeller was replaced with a four-bladed model in 1845. SS Great Britain was initially designed to have paddles but the design was modified after screw propellers were proven to be more effective and efficient. SS   Archimedes was built in 1838 by Henry Wimshurst of London, as the worlds first steamship 21  to be driven by a screw propeller . 22  23  24  25  Archimedes had considerable influence on ship development, encouraging the adoption of screw propulsion by the Royal Navy , in addition to her influence on commercial vessels. Trials with Smiths Archimedes led to the famous tug-of-war competition in 1845 between the screw-driven HMS   Rattler and the paddle steamer HMS   Alecto  the former pulling the latter backward at 2.5 knots 4.6  kmh. She also had a direct influence on the design of another innovative vessel, Isambard Kingdom Brunel s SS   Great Britain in 1843, then the worlds largest ship and the first screw-propelled steamship to cross the Atlantic Ocean in August 1845. HMS   Terror and HMS   Erebus were both heavily modified to become the first Royal Navy ships to have steam-powered engines and screw propellers. Both participated in Franklins lost expedition , last seen by Europeans in July 1845 near Baffin Bay . Screw propeller design stabilized in the 1880s. Shaftless propellers  edit  Propellers without a central shaft use propeller blades attached to a ring. The ring is part of a circle-shaped electric motor. This is known as a Rim-driven thruster and has been used by some small, self-guided robotic ships. In the United Kingdom, this design has been referenced by the ambiguous phrase screwless propulsion. Aircraft propellers  edit  ATR 72 propeller in flight Main article Propeller aeronautics The twisted aerofoil shape of modern aircraft propellers was pioneered by the Wright brothers . While some earlier engineers had attempted to model air propellers on marine propellers, the Wrights realized that a propeller is essentially the same as a wing , and were able to use data from their earlier wind tunnel experiments on wings. They also introduced a twist along the length of the blades. This was necessary to ensure the angle of attack of the blades was kept relatively constant along their length. 26  Their original propeller blades were only about 5 less efficient than the modern equivalent, some 100 years later. 27  The understanding of low speed propeller aerodynamics was fairly complete by the 1920s, but later requirements to handle more power in smaller diameter have made the problem more complex. Alberto Santos Dumont , another early pioneer, applied the knowledge he gained from experiences with airships to make a propeller with a steel shaft and aluminium blades for his 14 bis biplane . Some of his designs used a bent aluminium sheet for blades, thus creating an airfoil shape. They were heavily undercambered , and this plus the absence of lengthwise twist made them less efficient than the Wright propellers. Even so, this was perhaps the first use of aluminium in the construction of an airscrew. Propeller theory  edit  History  edit  In the second half of the nineteenth century, several theories were developed. The momentum theory or disk actuator theory  a theory describing a mathematical model of an ideal propeller  was developed by W.J.M. Rankine 1865, Alfred George Greenhill 1888 and R.E. Froude 1889. The propeller is modelled as an infinitely thin disc, inducing a constant velocity along the axis of rotation. This disc creates a flow around the propeller. Under certain mathematical premises of the fluid, there can be extracted a mathematical connection between power, radius of the propeller, torque and induced velocity. Friction is not included. The blade element theory BET is a mathematical process originally designed by William Froude 1878, David W. Taylor 1893 and Stefan Drzewiecki to determine the behaviour of propellers. It involves breaking an airfoil down into several small parts then determining the forces on them. These forces are then converted into accelerations , which can be integrated into velocities and positions. Theory of operation  edit  Marine propeller nomenclature 1 Trailing edge 2 Face 3 Fillet area 4 Hub or Boss 5 Hub or Boss Cap 6 Leading edge 7 Back 8 Propeller shaft 9 Stern tube bearing 10 Stern tube A propeller is the most common propulsor on ships, imparting momentum to a fluid which causes a force to act on the ship. The ideal efficiency of any propulsor is that of an actuator disc in an ideal fluid. This is called the Froude efciency and is a natural limit which cannot be exceeded by any device, no matter how good it is. Any propulsor which has virtually zero slip in the water, whether this is a very large propeller or a huge drag device, approaches 100 Froude efciency. The essence of the actuator-disc theory is that if the slip is dened as the ratio of uid velocity increase through the disc to vehicle velocity, the Froude efciency is equal to 1slip  1 28  . Thus a lightly loaded propeller with a large swept area can have a high Froude efciency. An actual propeller has blades made up of sections of helicoidal surfaces which can be thought to screw through the fluid hence the common reference to propellers as  screws . Actually the blades are twisted airfoils or hydrofoils and each section contributes to the total thrust. Two to five blades are most common, although designs which are intended to operate at reduced noise will have more blades and one-bladed ones with a counterweight have also been used. Lightly loaded propellers for light aircraft and human-powered boats mostly have two blades, motor boats mostly have three blades. The blades are attached to a boss hub, which should be as small as the needs of strength allow  with fixed-pitch propellers the blades and boss are usually a single casting. An alternative design is the controllable-pitch propeller CPP, or CRP for controllable-reversible pitch, where the blades are rotated normally to the drive shaft by additional machinery  usually hydraulics  at the hub and control linkages running down the shaft. This allows the drive machinery to operate at a constant speed while the propeller loading is changed to match operating conditions. It also eliminates the need for a reversing gear and allows for more rapid change to thrust, as the revolutions are constant. This type of propeller is most common on ships such as tugs where there can be enormous differences in propeller loading when towing compared to running free. The downsides of a CPPCRP include the large hub which decreases the torque required to cause cavitation , the mechanical complexity which limits transmission power and the extra blade shaping requirements forced upon the propeller designer. For smaller motors there are self-pitching propellers. The blades freely move through an entire circle on an axis at right angles to the shaft. This allows hydrodynamic and centrifugal forces to set the angle the blades reach and so the pitch of the propeller. A propeller that turns clockwise to produce forward thrust, when viewed from aft, is called right-handed. One that turns anticlockwise is said to be left-handed. Larger vessels often have twin screws to reduce heeling torque , counter-rotating propellers , the starboard screw is usually right-handed and the port left-handed, this is called outward turning. The opposite case is called inward turning. Another possibility is contra-rotating propellers , where two propellers rotate in opposing directions on a single shaft, or on separate shafts on nearly the same axis. Contra-rotating propellers offer increased efficiency by capturing the energy lost in the tangential velocities imparted to the fluid by the forward propeller known as propeller swirl. The flow field behind the aft propeller of a contra-rotating set has very little swirl, and this reduction in energy loss is seen as an increased efficiency of the aft propeller. An azimuthing propeller is a propeller that turns around the vertical axis. The individual airfoil-shaped blades turn as the propeller moves so that they are always generating lift in the vessels direction of movement. This type of propeller can reverse or change its direction of thrust very quickly. Fixed-wing aircraft are also subject to the P-factor effect, in which a rotating propeller will yaw an aircraft slightly to one side because the relative wind it produces is asymmetrical. It is particularly noticeable when climbing, but is usually simple to compensate for with the aircrafts rudder. A more serious situation can exist if a multi-engine aircraft loses power to one of its engines, in particular the one which is positioned on the side that enhances the P-factor. This power plant is called the critical engine and its loss will require more control compensation by the pilot. Geometric pitch is the distance an element of an airplane propeller would advance in one revolution if it were moving along a helix having an angle equal to that between the chord of the element and a plane perpendicular to the propeller axis. Marine propeller cavitation  edit  Cavitating propeller in water tunnel experiment Cavitation damage evident on the propeller of a personal watercraft. Cavitation is the formation of vapor bubbles in water near a moving propeller blade in regions of low pressure due to Bernoullis principle . It can occur if an attempt is made to transmit too much power through the screw, or if the propeller is operating at a very high speed. Cavitation can waste power, create vibration and wear, and cause damage to the propeller. It can occur in many ways on a propeller. The two most common types of propeller cavitation are suction side surface cavitation and tip vortex cavitation. Suction side surface cavitation forms when the propeller is operating at high rotational speeds or under heavy load high blade lift coefficient . The pressure on the upstream surface of the blade the suction side can drop below the vapor pressure of the water, resulting in the formation of a vapor pocket. Under such conditions, the change in pressure between the downstream surface of the blade the pressure side and the suction side is limited, and eventually reduced as the extent of cavitation is increased. When most of the blade surface is covered by cavitation, the pressure difference between the pressure side and suction side of the blade drops considerably, as does the thrust produced by the propeller. This condition is called thrust breakdown. Operating the propeller under these conditions wastes energy, generates considerable noise, and as the vapor bubbles collapse it rapidly erodes the screws surface due to localized shock waves against the blade surface. Tip vortex cavitation is caused by the extremely low pressures formed at the core of the tip vortex. The tip vortex is caused by fluid wrapping around the tip of the propeller from the pressure side to the suction side. This video demonstrates tip vortex cavitation. Tip vortex cavitation typically occurs before suction side surface cavitation and is less damaging to the blade, since this type of cavitation doesnt collapse on the blade, but some distance downstream. Cavitation can be used as an advantage in design of very high performance propellers, in the form of the supercavitating propeller . In this case, the blade section is designed such that the pressure side stays wetted while the suction side is completely covered by cavitation vapor. Because the suction side is covered with vapor instead of water it encounters very low viscous friction, making the supercavitating SC propeller comparably efficient at high speed. The shaping of SC blade sections however, make it inefficient at low speeds, when the suction side of the blade is wetted. See also fluid dynamics . A similar, but quite separate issue, is ventilation, which occurs when a propeller operating near the surface draws air into the blades, causing a similar loss of power and shaft vibration, but without the related potential blade surface damage caused by cavitation. Both effects can be mitigated by increasing the submerged depth of the propeller cavitation is reduced because the hydrostatic pressure increases the margin to the vapor pressure, and ventilation because it is further from surface waves and other air pockets that might be drawn into the slipstream. The blade profile of propellers designed to operate in a ventilated condition is often not of an aerofoil section and is a blunt ended taper instead. These are often known as chopper type propellers. 14-ton propeller from Voroshilov , a Kirov -class cruiser on display in Sevastopol Forces acting on a foil  edit  The force F experienced by a foil is determined by its area A, fluid density , velocity V and the angle of the foil to the fluid flow, called angle of attack   displaystyle alpha  , where F  A V 2  f  R n ,   displaystyle frac Frho AV2fR_n,alpha  The force has two parts  that normal to the direction of flow is lift L and that in the direction of flow is drag D. Both can be expressed mathematically L  C L 1 2  V 2 A displaystyle LC_Ltfrac 12rho V2A and D  C D 1 2  V 2 A displaystyle DC_Dtfrac 12rho V2A where C L and C D are lift coefficient and drag coefficient respectively. Each coefficient is a function of the angle of attack and Reynolds number . As the angle of attack increases lift rises rapidly from the no lift angle before slowing its increase and then decreasing, with a sharp drop as the stall angle is reached and flow is disrupted. Drag rises slowly at first and as the rate of increase in lift falls and the angle of attack increases drag increases more sharply. For a given strength of circulation   displaystyle tau  , Lift  L   V  displaystyle mboxLiftLrho Vtau  . The effect of the flow over and the circulation around the foil is to reduce the velocity over the face and increase it over the back of the blade. If the reduction in pressure is too much in relation to the ambient pressure of the fluid, cavitation occurs, bubbles form in the low pressure area and are moved towards the blades trailing edge where they collapse as the pressure increases, this reduces propeller efficiency and increases noise. The forces generated by the bubble collapse can cause permanent damage to the surfaces of the blade. Propeller thrust Equation  edit  Single blade  edit  Taking an arbitrary radial section of a blade at r , if revolutions are N then the rotational velocity is 2  N r displaystyle scriptstyle 2pi Nr . If the blade was a complete screw it would advance through a solid at the rate of NP , where P is the pitch of the blade. In water the advance speed is rather lower, V a displaystyle scriptstyle V_a , the difference, or slip ratio , is Slip  N P  V a N P  1  J p displaystyle mboxSlipfrac NP-V_aNP1-frac Jp where J  V a N D displaystyle scriptstyle Jfrac V_aND is the advance coefficient , and p  P D displaystyle scriptstyle pfrac PD is the pitch ratio . The forces of lift and drag on the blade, dA , where force normal to the surface is dL  d L  1 2  V 1 2 C L d A  1 2  C L  V a 2  1  a  2  4  2 r 2  1  a   2  b d r displaystyle mboxdLfrac 12rho V_12C_LdAfrac 12rho C_LV_a21a24pi 2r21-a2bmboxdr where V 1 2  V a 2  1  a  2  4  2 r 2  1  a   2 d D  1 2  V 1 2 C D d A  1 2  C D  V a 2  1  a  2  4  2 r 2  1  a   2  b d r displaystyle beginalignedV_12 V_a21a24pi 2r21-a2mboxdD frac 12rho V_12C_DmboxdAfrac 12rho C_DV_a21a24pi 2r21-a2bmboxdrendaligned These forces contribute to thrust, T , on the blade d T  d L cos    d D sin    d L  cos    d D d L sin    displaystyle mboxdTmboxdLcos varphi -mboxdDsin varphi mboxdLcos varphi -frac mboxdDmboxdLsin varphi  where tan    d D d L  C D C L  1 2  V 1 2 C L cos       cos   b d r displaystyle beginalignedtan beta frac mboxdDmboxdLfrac C_DC_L frac 12rho V_12C_Lfrac cosvarphi beta cos beta bmboxdrendaligned As V 1  V a  1  a  sin   displaystyle scriptstyle V_1frac V_a1asin varphi  , d T  1 2  C L V a 2  1  a  2 cos       sin 2   cos   b d r displaystyle mboxdTfrac 12rho C_Lfrac V_a21a2cosvarphi beta sin 2varphi cos beta bmboxdr From this total thrust can be obtained by integrating this expression along the blade. The transverse force is found in a similar manner d M  d L sin    d D cos    d L  sin    d D d L cos     1 2  V 1 2 C L sin       cos   b d r displaystyle beginalignedmboxdM mboxdLsin varphi mboxdDcos varphi  mboxdLsin varphi frac mboxdDmboxdLcos varphi  frac 12rho V_12C_Lfrac sinvarphi beta cos varphi bmboxdrendaligned Substituting for V 1 displaystyle scriptstyle V_1 and multiplying by r , gives torque as d Q  r d M  1 2  C L V a 2  1  a  2 sin       sin 2   cos   b r d r displaystyle mboxdQrmboxdMfrac 12rho C_Lfrac V_a21a2sinvarphi beta sin 2varphi cos beta brmboxdr which can be integrated as before. The total thrust power of the propeller is proportional to T V a displaystyle scriptstyle TV_a and the shaft power to 2  N Q displaystyle scriptstyle 2pi NQ . So efficiency is T V a 2  N Q displaystyle scriptstyle frac TV_a2pi NQ . The blade efficiency is in the ratio between thrust and torque blade element efficiency  V a 2  N r  1 tan       displaystyle mboxblade element efficiencyfrac V_a2pi Nrcdot frac 1tanvarphi beta  showing that the blade efficiency is determined by its momentum and its qualities in the form of angles  displaystyle scriptstyle varphi  and  displaystyle scriptstyle beta  , where  displaystyle scriptstyle beta  is the ratio of the drag and lift coefficients. This analysis is simplified and ignores a number of significant factors including interference between the blades and the influence of tip vortices. Thrust and torque  edit  The thrust, T , and torque, Q , depend on the propellers diameter, D , revolutions, N , and rate of advance, V a displaystyle V_a , together with the character of the fluid in which the propeller is operating and gravity. These factors create the following non-dimensional relationship T   V 2 D 2  f 1  N D V a  , f 2  v V a D  , f 3  g D V a 2   displaystyle Trho V2D2leftf_1leftfrac NDV_aright,f_2leftfrac vV_aDright,f_3leftfrac gDV_a2rightright where f 1 displaystyle f_1 is a function of the advance coefficient, f 2 displaystyle f_2 is a function of the Reynolds number, and f 3 displaystyle f_3 is a function of the Froude number . Both f 2 displaystyle f_2 and f 3 displaystyle f_3 are likely to be small in comparison to f 1 displaystyle f_1 under normal operating conditions, so the expression can be reduced to T   V a 2 D 2  f r  N D V a  displaystyle Trho V_a2D2times f_rleftfrac NDV_aright For two identical propellers the expression for both will be the same. So with the propellers T 1 , T 2 displaystyle T_1,T_2 , and using the same subscripts to indicate each propeller T 1 T 2   1  2  V a 1 2 V a 2 2  D 1 2 D 2 2 displaystyle frac T_1T_2frac rho _1rho _2times frac V_a12V_a22times frac D_12D_22 For both Froude number and advance coefficient T 1 T 2   1  2  D 1 3 D 2 3   1  2  3 displaystyle frac T_1T_2frac rho _1rho _2times frac D_13D_23frac rho _1rho _2lambda 3 where  displaystyle lambda  is the ratio of the linear dimensions. Thrust and velocity, at the same Froude number, give thrust power P T 1 P T 2   1  2  3.5 displaystyle frac P_T1P_T2frac rho _1rho _2lambda 3.5 For torque Q   V a 2 D 3  f q  N D V a  displaystyle Qrho V_a2D3times f_qleftfrac NDV_aright . . . displaystyle ... Actual performance  edit  When a propeller is added to a ship its performance is altered there is the mechanical losses in the transmission of power a general increase in total resistance and the hull also impedes and renders non-uniform the flow through the propeller. The ratio between a propellers efficiency attached to a ship  P D displaystyle scriptstyle P_D  and in open water  P D  displaystyle scriptstyle P_D  is termed relative rotative efficiency. The overall propulsive efficiency an extension of effective power  P E displaystyle scriptstyle P_E  is developed from the propulsive coefficient  P C displaystyle scriptstyle PC , which is derived from the installed shaft power  P S displaystyle scriptstyle P_S  modified by the effective power for the hull with appendages  P E  displaystyle scriptstyle P_E , the propellers thrust power  P T displaystyle scriptstyle P_T , and the relative rotative efficiency. P E  displaystyle P_E  P T displaystyle P_T  hull efficiency   H displaystyle eta _H P T displaystyle P_T  P D  displaystyle P_D  propeller efficiency   O displaystyle eta _O P D  displaystyle P_D  P D displaystyle P_D  relative rotative efficiency   R displaystyle eta _R P D displaystyle P_D  P S displaystyle P_S  shaft transmission efficiency Producing the following P C    H   O   R appendage coefficient   transmission efficiency displaystyle PCleftfrac eta _Hcdot eta _Ocdot eta _Rmboxappendage coefficientrightcdot mboxtransmission efficiency The terms contained within the brackets are commonly grouped as the quasi-propulsive coefficient  Q P C displaystyle scriptstyle QPC ,  D displaystyle scriptstyle eta _D . The Q P C displaystyle scriptstyle QPC is produced from small-scale experiments and is modified with a load factor for full size ships. Wake is the interaction between the ship and the water with its own velocity relative to the ship. The wake has three parts the velocity of the water around the hull the boundary layer between the water dragged by the hull and the surrounding flow and the waves created by the movement of the ship. The first two parts will reduce the velocity of water into the propeller, the third will either increase or decrease the velocity depending on whether the waves create a crest or trough at the propeller. Types of marine propellers  edit  Controllable-pitch propeller  edit  A controllable-pitch propeller The controllable-pitch propeller has several advantages over the fixed-pitch variety. These include the least drag depending on the speed used, the ability to move the sea vessel backwards, and the ability to use the vane-stance, which gives the least water resistance when not using the propeller e.g. when the sails are used instead. Skewback propeller  edit  An advanced type of propeller used on German Type 212 submarines is called a skewback propeller . As in the scimitar blades used on some aircraft, the blade tips of a skewback propeller are swept back against the direction of rotation. In addition, the blades are tilted rearward along the longitudinal axis, giving the propeller an overall cup-shaped appearance. This design preserves thrust efficiency while reducing cavitation, and thus makes for a quiet, stealthy design. 29  A small number of ships use propellers with winglets similar to those on some airplanes, reducing tip vortices and improving efficiency. 30  31  32  33  34  See also astern propulsion Modular propeller  edit  A modular propeller provides more control over the boats performance. There is no need to change an entire prop, when there is an opportunity to only change the pitch or the damaged blades. Being able to adjust pitch will allow for boaters to have better performance while in different altitudes, water sports, andor cruising. 35  Voith Schneider propeller  edit  Voith Schneider propellers use four untwisted straight blades turning around a vertical axis instead of helical blades and can provide thrust in any direction at any time, at the cost of higher mechanical complexity. Protection of small engines  edit  A failed rubber bushing in an outboard s propeller For smaller engines, such as outboards, where the propeller is exposed to the risk of collision with heavy objects, the propeller often includes a device that is designed to fail when overloaded the device or the whole propeller is sacrificed so that the more expensive transmission and engine are not damaged. Typically in smaller less than 10  hp or 7.5  kW and older engines, a narrow shear pin through the drive shaft and propeller hub transmits the power of the engine at normal loads. The pin is designed to shear when the propeller is put under a load that could damage the engine. After the pin is sheared the engine is unable to provide propulsive power to the boat until a new shear pin is fitted. 36  In larger and more modern engines, a rubber bushing transmits the torque of the drive shaft to the propellers hub. Under a damaging load the friction of the bushing in the hub is overcome and the rotating propeller slips on the shaft, preventing overloading of the engines components. 37  After such an event the rubber bushing may be damaged. If so, it may continue to transmit reduced power at low revolutions, but may provide no power, due to reduced friction, at high revolutions. Also, the rubber bushing may perish over time leading to its failure under loads below its designed failure load. Whether a rubber bushing can be replaced or repaired depends upon the propeller some cannot. Some can, but need special equipment to insert the oversized bushing for an interference fit . Others can be replaced easily. The special equipment usually consists of a funnel, a press and rubber lubricant soap. If one does not have access to a lathe, an improvised funnel can be made from steel tube and car body filler as the filler is only subject to compressive forces it is able to do a good job. Often, the bushing can be drawn into place with nothing more complex than a couple of nuts, washers and a threaded rod. A more serious problem with this type of propeller is a frozen-on spline bushing, which makes propeller removal impossible. In such cases the propeller must be heated in order to deliberately destroy the rubber insert. Once the propeller is removed, the splined tube can be cut away with a grinder and a new spline bushing is then required. To prevent a recurrence of the problem, the splines can be coated with anti-seize anti-corrosion compound. In some modern propellers, a hard polymer insert called a drive sleeve replaces the rubber bushing. The splined or other non-circular cross section of the sleeve inserted between the shaft and propeller hub transmits the engine torque to the propeller, rather than friction. The polymer is weaker than the components of the propeller and engine so it fails before they do when the propeller is overloaded. 38  This fails completely under excessive load, but can easily be replaced. Propeller variations  edit  Cleaver  edit  A cleaver is a type of propeller design especially used for boat racing. Its leading edge is formed round, while the trailing edge is cut straight. It provides little bow lift, so that it can be used on boats that do not need much bow lift, for instance hydroplanes , that naturally have enough hydrodynamic bow lift. To compensate for the lack of bow lift, a hydrofoil may be installed on the lower unit. Hydrofoils reduce bow lift and help to get a boat out of the hole and onto plane. See also  edit  Screw-propelled vehicle    Vehicle propelled by load-bearing rotating helical flanges Propeller characteristics  edit  Advance ratio    Ratio of freestream speed to tip speed Axial fan design Propeller phenomena  edit  Propeller walk    Tendency of a propeller to yaw a vessel during acceleration Cavitation    Formation of vapour-filled low-pressure voids in a liquid Other  edit  Adjustable pitch propeller Azimuth thruster    Steerable propulsion pod under a watercraft Azipod    Electric drive azimuth thruster Bowstern thruster    Transverse or steerable propulsion device in a watercraft Controllable pitch propeller Ducted propeller    Marine propeller with a non-rotating nozzle Pump-jet    Marine propulsion system Folding propeller    Propeller with blades that fold open when rotating Helix    Type of smooth space curve Impeller Kitchen rudder    Type of directional propulsion system for vessels Modular propeller Paddle steamer    Steam powered vessel propelled by paddle wheels Pleuger rudder    A thruster assisted ships rudder Propulsor    A machinical device to propel a vessel Variable-pitch propeller    Propeller with blades that can be rotated to control their pitch while in use Voith-Schneider propeller    Perpendicular axis marine propulsion system Supercavitating propeller    Marine propeller designed to operate with a full cavitation bubble Materials and manufacture  edit  External video Construction of Wooden Propellers 1 2 3 , NASA Langley Balancing machine Composite materials Notes  edit   Carlton, John, Marine Propellers and Propulsion Butterworth-Heinemann, 2012, p. 363  a b Carlton, p. 1  Murihead, James Patrick, The Life of James Watt, with Selections from His Correspondence ... With Portraits and Woodcuts , London John Murray, 1858, p. 208  Stein, Stephen K. The Sea in World History Exploration, Travel, and Trade 2 volumes , Editor Stephen K. Stein, ABC-CLIO, 2017, Volume 1, p. 600  Manstan, Roy R. Frese, Frederic J., Turtle David Bushnells Revolutionary Vessel , Yardley, Pa Westholme Publishing. .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em ISBN   978-1-59416-105-6 . OCLC 369779489, 2010, pp. xiii, 52, 53  Tucker, Spencer, Almanac of American Military History , ABC-CLIO, 2013, Volume 1, p. 305  Mansten pp. xiii, xiv  Nicholson, William, A Journal of Natural Philosophy, Chemistry and the Arts , Volume 4, G. G. and J. Robinson, 1801, p. 221  Manstan, p.150  Carlton, pp. 12  Carlton, p.2  Carlton, p.2  Paul Augustin Normand, La Gense de lHlice Propulsive The Genesis of the Screw Propulsor . Paris Acadmie de Marine, 1962, pp. 3150.  Mario Theriault, Great Maritime Inventions Goose Lane Publishing 2001 pp. 5859  Patchs Propeller, Scientific America , Vol. 4, No. 5 October 10, 1848 p. 33, featured in The Archimedes Screw website retrieved 31 January 2010 Archived 8 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine  Smith, Edgar C. 1905. A Short history of Naval and Marine Engineering . University Press, Cambridge. pp.  6667.  a b Bourne, p. 84.  In the case of Francis B. Ogden , Symonds was correct. Ericsson had made the mistake of placing the rudder forward of the propellers, which made the rudder ineffective. Symonds believed that Ericsson tried to disguise the problem by towing a barge during the test.  Bourne, pp. 8789.  Bourne, p. 85.  The emphasis here is on ship . There were a number of successful propeller-driven vessels prior to Archimedes , including Smiths own Francis Smith and Ericssons Francis B. Ogden and Robert F. Stockton . However, these vessels were boats  designed for service on inland waterways  as opposed to ships , built for seagoing service.  The type of screw propeller that now propels the vast majority of boats and ships was patented in 1836, first by the British engineer Francis Pettit Smith, then by the Swedish engineer John Ericsson. Smith used the design in the first successful screw-driven steamship, Archimedes , which was launched in 1839.. Marshall Cavendish, p. 1335.  The propeller was invented in 1836 by Francis Pettit Smith in Britain and John Ericsson in the United States. It first powered a seagoing ship, appropriately called Archimedes , in 1839. Macauley and Ardley, p. 378.  In 1839, the Messrs. Rennie constructed the engines, machinery and propeller, for the celebrated Archimedes , from which may be said to date the introduction of the screw system of propulsion  .... Mechanics Magazine , p. 220.  It was not until 1839 that the principle of propelling steamships by a screw blade was fairly brought before the world, and for this we are indebted, as almost every adult will remember, to Mr. F. P. Smith of London. He was the man who first made the screw propeller practically useful. Aided by spirited capitalists, he built a large steamer named the Archimedes, and the results obtained from her at once arrested public attention.. MacFarlane, p. 109.  Pilots Handbook of Aeronautical Knowledge . Oklahoma City U.S. Federal Aviation Administration. 2008. pp.  27. FAA-8083-25A.  Ash, Robert L., Colin P. Britcher and Kenneth W. Hyde. Wrights How two brothers from Dayton added a new twist to airplane propulsion. Mechanical Engineering 100 years of Flight , 3 July 2007.  Schmidt, Theo. Propeller simulation with PropSim PDF . Human Power Number 48 .  SILENT propellers . www.francehelices.fr . JMCWebCreation and Co. 2009 . Retrieved July 21, 2017 .  Godske, Bjrn.  Energy saving propeller  in Danish  Ingeniren , 23 April 2012. Accessed 15 March 2014. English translation  Godske, Bjrn.  Kappel-propellers pave the way for success at MAN  in Danish  Ingeniren , 15 March 2014. Accessed 15 March 2014. English translation   Kappel agreement secures access to major market  30 August 2013.   KAPRICCIO Project  European Union . Accessed 15 March 2014.   Industry Pays Tribute to Innovation Awards Winners  Marine link , 3 October 2002. Accessed 15 March 2014. Quote Winner the energy-saving Kappel propeller concept from the European Commission-funded Kapriccio propulsion research project. Blades curved towards the tips on the suction side reduce energy losses, fuel consumption, noise and vibration  Smrcka, Karel March 18, 2005. A new start for marine propellers . Engineering News . Retrieved July 21, 2017 .  Getchell, David 1994, The Outboard Boaters Handbook , ISBN   9780070230538  Ministry Of Defence Navy, Great Britain 1995, Admiralty Manual of Seamanship , ISBN   9780117726963  US , Torsionally twisting propeller drive sleeve and adapter, published March 8, 1994, issued January 16, 1996   External links  edit  Wikimedia Commons has media related to Propellers . Titanics Propellers Theory calculation propellers and wings  detailed article with blade element theory software application What You Should Know About Propellers For Our Fighting Planes, November 1943, Popular Science extremely detailed article with numerous drawings and cutaway illustrations Archimedes Screw History  The story of marine propulsion propellers history  The story of propellers 1  Wartsila Marine Propellers Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitlePropeller oldid912711869  Categories  Propellers Watercraft components Swedish inventions Hidden categories Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Commons category link is on Wikidata