System testing From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search This article needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources   System testing     news    newspapers    books    scholar    JSTOR  January 2013   Learn how and when to remove this template message  This article may be unbalanced towards certain viewpoints . Please improve the article by adding information on neglected viewpoints, or discuss the issue on the talk page .  October 2018  See also System integration testing System testing is testing conducted on a complete integrated system to evaluate the systems compliance with its specified requirements .  citation needed  System testing takes, as its input, all of the integrated components that have passed integration testing . The purpose of integration testing is to detect any inconsistencies between the units that are integrated together called assemblages . System testing seeks to detect defects both within the inter-assemblages and also within the system as a whole.  citation needed  The actual result is the behavior produced or observed when a component or system is tested. 1  System testing is performed on the entire system in the context of either functional requirement specifications FRS or system requirement specification SRS, or both. System testing tests not only the design, but also the behaviour and even the believed expectations of the customer. It is also intended to test up to and beyond the bounds defined in the software or hardware requirements specifications.  citation needed  Contents 1 Approaches 2 Subject-specific test methods 2.1 Software testing 2.2 Mobile-device testing 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References Approaches  edit  Destructive testing  tests are carried out to the specimens failure, in order to understand a specimens performance or material behaviour under different loads. Nondestructive testing  analysis techniques to evaluate the properties of a material, component or system without causing damage. Subject-specific test methods  edit  Software testing  edit  Software testing is an investigation conducted to provide stakeholders with information about the quality of the software product or service under test. 2  Software testing can also provide an objective, independent view of the software to allow the business to appreciate and understand the risks of software implementation. Software testing involves the execution of a software component or system component to evaluate one or more properties of interest. In general, these properties indicate the extent to which the component or sy stem under test meets the requirements that guided its design and development, responds correctly to all kinds of inputs, performs its functions within an acceptable time, is sufficiently usable, can be installed and run in its intended environments, and achieves the general result its stakeholders desire. As the number of possible tests for even simple software components is p ractically infinite, all software testing uses some strategy to select tests that are feasible for the available time and resources. Mobile-device testing  edit  Mobile-device testing assures the quality of mobile devices, like mobile phones, PDAs, etc. The testing will be conducted on both hardware and software. And from the view of different procedures, the testing comprises R D testing, factory testing and certificate testing. Mobile-device testing involves a set of activities from monitoring and trouble shooting mobile application, content and services on real handsets. Testing includes verification and validation of hardware devices and software applications. See also  edit  Automatic test equipment Test case Test fixture Test plan Automated testing Quality control Notes  edit   ISTQB Standard glossary of terms used in Software Testing . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Kaner, Cem November 17, 2006. Exploratory Testing PDF . Quality Assurance Institute Worldwide Annual Software Testing Conference . Orlando, FL . Retrieved November 22, 2014 . References  edit  Black, Rex 2002. Managing the Testing Process 2nd ed.. Wiley Publishing. ISBN   0-471-22398-0 . Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSystem_testing oldid914583260  Categories  Software testing Hardware testing Systems engineering Hidden categories Articles needing additional references from January 2013 All articles needing additional references Articles needing more viewpoints from October 2018 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2008