Ron Morrison From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .  Learn how and when to remove these template messages  This article relies largely or entirely on a single source . Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing citations to additional sources.  April 2009  The topic of this article may not meet Wikipedias notability guideline for academics . Please help to establish notability by citing reliable secondary sources that are independent of the topic and provide significant coverage of it beyond a mere trivial mention. If notability cannot be established, the article is likely to be merged , redirected , or deleted . Find sources   Ron Morrison     news    newspapers    books    scholar    JSTOR  April 2009   Learn how and when to remove this template message  This biography of a living person relies too much on references to primary sources . Please help by adding secondary or tertiary sources . Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately , especially if potentially libelous or harmful.  February 2013   Learn how and when to remove this template message   Learn how and when to remove this template message  Professor Ron Morrison was the head of School of the computer science department of the University of St. Andrews and the inventor of the S-algol programming language, and co-inventor of the PS-algol and Napier88 languages. Ron is also heavily involved with local athletics , coaching the University Cross-Country team as well as young, up and coming local athletes. He is a Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh . He retired from the University of St. Andrews in January 2008. 1  Selected publications  edit  Morrison, Ron 1979, On the Development of Algol PDF PhD thesis, Fife University of St Andrews .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em Morrison, Ron 1979, S-algol Reference Manual PDF tech report CS791, Fife University of St Andrews Davie, A.J.T. Morrison, R. 1981, Recursive Descent Compiling , Ellis-Horwood, ISBN   0-470-27270-8 Cole, A.J. Morrison, R. 1982, An introduction to programming with S-algol , Cambridge University Press, ISBN   0-521-25001-3 Atkinson, M.P. Bailey, P.J. Chisholm, K.J. Cockshott, W.P. Morrison, R. 1983, PS-algol A Language for Persistent Programming PDF , Proc. 10th Australian National Computer Conference , Melbourne, Australia 7079 Morrison, R Connor, RCH Cutts, QI Kirby, GNC Munro, DS Atkinson, MP 1999, The Napier88 Persistent Programming Language and Environment, in Atkinson, MP Welland, R eds., Fully Integrated Data Environments PDF , Springer, pp.  98154, ISBN   3-540-65772-X References  edit   News Archived 6 March 2008 at the Wayback Machine External links  edit  Home page at st-andrews.ac.uk Keynes Without Debt This article on a computer specialist of the United Kingdom is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it . v t e This article about a British scientist is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it . v t e Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleRon_Morrison oldid838020156  Categories  Living people British computer specialist stubs British scientist stubs Hidden categories Webarchive template wayback links Use dmy dates from April 2018 Use British English from April 2018 Articles needing additional references from April 2009 All articles needing additional references Articles with topics of unclear notability from April 2009 All articles with topics of unclear notability Academics articles with topics of unclear notability Articles lacking reliable references from February 2013 All articles lacking reliable references BLP articles lacking sources from February 2013 Articles with multiple maintenance issues Year of birth missing living people All stub articles