Engineering physics From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Engineering physics or engineering science refers to the study of the combined disciplines of physics , mathematics and engineering , particularly computer, nuclear, electrical, electronic, materials or mechanical engineering. By focusing on the scientific method as a rigorous basis, it seeks ways to apply, design, and develop new solutions in engineering. 1  2  3  4  Contents 1 Overview 2 Careers 3 Branches 4 See also 5 Notes and references 6 External links Overview  edit  Unlike traditional engineering disciplines, engineering sciencephysics is not necessarily confined to a particular branch of science, engineering or physics. Instead, engineering sciencephysics is meant to provide a more thorough grounding in applied physics for a selected specialty such as optics , quantum physics , materials science , applied mechanics , electronics , nanotechnology , microfabrication , microelectronics , computing , photonics , mechanical engineering , electrical engineering , nuclear engineering , biophysics , control theory , aerodynamics , energy , solid-state physics , etc. It is the discipline devoted to creating and optimizing engineering solutions through enhanced understanding and integrated application of mathematical, scientific, statistical, and engineering principles. The discipline is also meant for cross-functionality and bridges the gap between theoretical science and practical engineering with emphasis in research and development, design, and analysis. It is notable that in many languages the term for engineering physics would be directly translated into English as technical physics. In some countries, both what would be translated as engineering physics and what would be translated as technical physics are disciplines leading to academic degrees, with the former specializing in nuclear power research, and the latter closer to engineering physics. 5  In some institutions, an engineering or applied physics major is a discipline or specialization within the scope of engineering science, or applied science. 6  7  8  In many universities, engineering science programs may be offered at the levels of B.Tech, B.Sc. , M.Sc. and Ph.D. Usually, a core of basic and advanced courses in mathematics , physics , chemistry , and biology forms the foundation of the curriculum , while typical elective areas may include fluid dynamics , quantum physics , economics , plasma physics , relativity , solid mechanics , operations research , quantitative finance , information technology and engineering, dynamical systems , bioengineering , environmental engineering , computational engineering, engineering mathematics and statistics , solid-state devices , materials science , electromagnetism , nanoscience , nanotechnology , energy , and optics . While typical undergraduate engineering programs generally focus on the application of established methods to the design and analysis of engineering solutions, undergraduate program in engineering science focuses on the creation and use of more advanced experimental or computational techniques where standard approaches are inadequate i.e., development of engineering solution s to contemporary problems in the physical and life sciences by applying fundamental principles. Careers  edit  Qualified Engineering Physicists , with a degree in Engineering Physics, can work professionally as Engineers andor Physicists in the high technology industries and beyond, becoming domain experts in multiple engineering and scientific fields. 9  10  11  Branches  edit  Accelerator physics 12  Acoustics 13  14  Aerospace Systems and Aerodynamics 15  16  Agrophysics Analog electronics Anti-gravity 17  18  Applied physics Applied mathematics Applied mechanics Artificial Intelligence 19  20  Astrodynamics Atomic Force microscopy and imaging Audio Engineering 14  Ballistics Biomechanics Biosensors and bioelectronics Biophysics 21  Bionanotechnology Chemical Engineering 22  Chemical physics Communication physics Computational physics Computer Engineering 23  24  Computer Vision Composite materials Control theory Cryogenics 25  Cybernetical Physics Data mining Digital electronics Digital signal processing 14  Directed Energy Weapons 26  Econophysics Electrical Engineering Electric propulsion Electrochemistry Electromagnetism Electromagnetic propulsion Electronic Warfare 27  Embedded Systems 28  Energy Engineering 14  Fiber optics Financial Engineering 14  Fluid dynamics Geoengineering Geophysics Information theory Instrumentation and control Interreality physics and Virtual Reality Laser physics Materials science and processing Mechatronics 29  Medical physics Metallurgy Metamaterials 14  Metrological physics 14  Microelectronics 24  Microfluidics , MEMS , and MOEMS Microfabrication Microprocessor design 12  Microwave Engineering Nanotechnology Neural engineering Neuromorphic engineering Nondestructive testing Nuclear electromagnetic pulse NEMP engineering Nuclear engineering 30  Nuclear technology 14  Photonics and Plasmonics Physics engine and Physics processing unit design Physical neural networks Plasma physics Polymer science Power electronics 31  Quantitative finance 32  14  Quantum electronics Quantum information Quantum technology 33  Radar and Lidar Radio-Frequency Engineering Robotics 29  and Machine learning 34  Renewable Energy Semiconductor physics and devices Sensor Fusion Software Development 23  Soil physics Solid-state physics Sonar Space physics Space technology 35  Spacecraft Propulsion Spintronics , Spin engineering Statistical mechanics Stealth Technology Systems Engineering 36  Systems biology Superconductors Thin films and nanostructured materials Vehicle dynamics See also  edit  Applied Physics Engineering Engineering mechanics Engineering science and mechanics Environmental Engineering Science Index of engineering science and mechanics articles Mathematics Science Notes and references  edit   Major Engineering Physics . The Princeton Review . The Princeton Review. 2017. p.  01 . Retrieved June 4, 2017 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Introduction online . Princeton University . Retrieved June 26, 2011 .  Khare, P. A. Swarup 2009-01-26. Engineering Physics Fundamentals  Modern Applications 13th ed.. Jones  Bartlett Learning. pp.  xiiiPreface. ISBN   978-0-7637-7374-8 .  Engineering Physics online . Retrieved June 26, 2011 .  2002 Applications for graduate study open in Shanghai Research Institute of Technical Physics 2002 . Chinese Academy of Sciences . 2001-10-07. Archived from the original on 2008-06-07 . Retrieved 2008-09-16 .  Division of Engineering and Applied Science, California Institute of Technology  Engineering Physics, Division of Engineering Science, University of Toronto  Engineering Science and Mechanics program at Virginia Tech  Stephen F. Austin State University, Engineering Physics Careers  Engineering Physics Careers, Carleton University, Canada  Learn.org, Engineering Physics Careers overview  a b Engineering Physics, University of Michigan  Engineering Physics Acoustics, University of Kettering  a b c d e f g h i Engineering Physics Curriculum, University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign  Engineering Physics Aerospace Systems, University of Kansas  Engineering Physics Aerodynamics, University of Kansas  Gravitational Shielding Effect in Gauge Theory of Gravity, Institute of Physics  Hondas Gravity Modification Research, Huffington Post  Physicists Teach AI to Identify Exotic States of Matter  Physicists Unleash AI to Devise Unthinkable Experiments  Engineering Physics Biophysics, Cornell University  Engineering Physics, Chemical Systems, University of Kansas  a b Engineering Physics, Berkeley  a b Engineering Physics Microelectronics, University of Connecticut  Universities offering Cryogenics and Superconductivity education in the United States, Cryogenic society of America  Golden Eye-style energy beam is developed by Nato scientists, Daily Telegraph  Johns Hopkins, Applied Physics Laboratory  Engineering Physics Embedded Systems, Simon Fraser University  a b University of the Pacific, Engineering Physics, Curriculum  Engineering Physics Nuclear Engineering, Ohio State University  Program of Engineering physics, Laval University, Quebec  Physicists applying knowledge to finance, The Guardian  Chinas quantum satellite achieves spooky action at record distance, Science Magazine  Physicists extend quantum machine learning to infinite dimensions, Phys.org  Engineering Physics, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University, Programme Options  Engineering Physics, Stanford External links  edit  Engineering Physics at Xavier The Engineering Physicist Profession Engineering Physicist Professional Profile Society of Engineering Science Inc. Weapon Physics and Design Program v t e Engineering Civil Architectural Construction Environmental Earthquake Geotechnical Hydraulic Mining Structural Transportation Mechanical Acoustical Aerospace Automotive Marine Railway Thermal Electrical Computer Control Electromechanics Electronics Microwaves Power Radio Frequency Telecommunications Chemical Biochemical Biological Molecular Petroleum Process Reaction Interdisciplinary Audio Biomedical Engineering mathematics Engineering mechanics Engineering physics Engineering science Fire Industrial Information Materials science Ceramics Metallurgy Polymer Mechatronics Military Nanotechnology Nuclear Optical Photonics Privacy Robotics Sanitary Security Software Systems Glossaries Engineering Aerospace engineering Civil engineering Electrical and electronics engineering Mechanical engineering Structural engineering List of engineering branches CategoryEngineering Engineering portal v t e Branches of physics Divisions Theoretical Phenomenology Computational Experimental Applied Classical Classical mechanics Continuum Solid Fluid Acoustics Electrodynamics Electrostatics Magnetostatics Plasma physics Accelerator physics Statistical mechanics Thermodynamics Condensed matter Materials Mesoscopic Polymers Soft Solid-state Modern Quantum mechanics Quantum electrodynamics Quantum field theory Quantum gravity Quantum information Relativity General Special Particle physics Astroparticle Nuclear Quantum chromodynamics Atomic, molecular and optical physics Atomic physics Molecular physics Optics Photonics Quantum optics Cosmology Astrophysics Nuclear Celestial mechanics Solar Heliophysics Space physics Interdisciplinary Biophysics Agrophysics Medical Neurophysics Engineering Geophysics Atmospheric Cloud Materials science Mathematical physics Physical chemistry Chemical physics Quantum computing Social physics Econophysics See also History of physics Nobel Prize in Physics Timeline of physics discoveries Theory of everything Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleEngineering_physics oldid910770465  Categories  Applied and interdisciplinary physics Engineering education