World Wide Web From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search WWW and The Web redirect here. For other uses of WWW, see WWW disambiguation . For other uses of web, see Web disambiguation . For the first web software, see WorldWideWeb . Not to be confused with the Internet . System of interlinked hypertext documents accessed over the Internet A web page can be displayed using a web browser. Web browsers often highlight and underline hypertext links and web pages can contain images. A global map of the web index for countries in 2014 The World Wide Web  WWW , commonly known as the Web , is an information system where documents and other web resources are identified by Uniform Resource Locators URLs, such as httpswww.example.com , which may be interlinked by hypertext , and are accessible over the Internet . 1  The resources of the WWW may be accessed by users by a software application called a web browser . English scientist Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989. He wrote the first web browser in 1990 while employed at CERN near Geneva, Switzerland. 2  3  The browser was released outside CERN in 1991, first to other research institutions starting in January 1991 and then to the general public in August 1991. The World Wide Web has been central to the development of the Information Age and is the primary tool billions of people use to interact on the Internet. 4  5  6  Web resources may be any type of downloaded media, but web pages are hypertext media that have been formatted in Hypertext Markup Language HTML. 7  Such formatting allows for embedded hyperlinks that contain URLs and permit users to navigate to other web resources. In addition to text , web pages may contain images , video , audio , and software components that are rendered in the users web browser as coherent pages of multimedia content. Multiple web resources with a common theme, a common domain name , or both, make up a website . Websites are stored in computers that are running a program called a web server that responds to requests made over the Internet from web browsers running on a users computer. Website content can be largely provided by a publisher, or interactively where users contribute content or the content depends upon the users or their actions. Websites may be provided for a myriad of informative, entertainment, commercial, governmental, or non-governmental reasons. Contents 1 History 2 Function 2.1 HTML 2.2 Linking 2.3 WWW prefix 2.4 Scheme specifiers 2.5 Page 2.5.1 Static page 2.5.2 Dynamic pages 2.6 Website 2.7 Browser 2.8 Server 2.9 Cookie 2.10 Search engine 2.11 Deep web 2.12 Caching 3 Security 4 Privacy 5 Standards 6 Accessibility 7 Internationalisation 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links History  edit  Main article History of the World Wide Web The NeXT Computer used by Tim Berners-Lee at CERN . The corridor where WWW was born. CERN , ground floor of building No.1 Tim Berners-Lee s vision of a global hyperlinked information system became a possibility by the second half of the 1980s. 8  By 1985, the global Internet began to proliferate in Europe and the Domain Name System upon which the Uniform Resource Locator is built came into being. In 1988 the first direct IP connection between Europe and North America was made and Berners-Lee began to openly discuss the possibility of a web-like system at CERN. 9  While working at CERN, Berners-Lee became frustrated with the inefficiencies and difficulties posed by finding information stored on different computers. 10  On March 12, 1989, he submitted a memorandum, titled Information Management A Proposal, 11  to the management at CERN for a system called Mesh that referenced ENQUIRE , a database and software project he had built in 1980, which used the term web and described a more elaborate information management system based on links embedded as text Imagine, then, the references in this document all being associated with the network address of the thing to which they referred, so that while reading this document, you could skip to them with a click of the mouse. Such a system, he explained, could be referred to using one of the existing meanings of the word hypertext , a term that he says was coined in the 1950s. There is no reason, the proposal continues, why such hypertext links could not encompass multimedia documents including graphics, speech and video, so that Berners-Lee goes on to use the term hypermedia . 12  With help from his colleague and fellow hypertext enthusiast Robert Cailliau he published a more formal proposal on 12 November 1990 to build a Hypertext project called WorldWideWeb one word as a web of hypertext documents to be viewed by  browsers  using a clientserver architecture . 13  At this point HTML and HTTP had already been in development for about two months and the first Web server was about a month from completing its first successful test. This proposal estimated that a read-only web would be developed within three months and that it would take six months to achieve the creation of new links and new material by readers, so that authorship becomes universal as well as the automatic notification of a reader when new material of interest to himher has become available. While the read-only goal was met, accessible authorship of web content took longer to mature, with the wiki concept, WebDAV , blogs , Web 2.0 and RSS  Atom . 14  The CERN data centre in 2010 housing some WWW servers The proposal was modelled after the SGML reader Dynatext by Electronic Book Technology, a spin-off from the Institute for Research in Information and Scholarship at Brown University . The Dynatext system, licensed by CERN, was a key player in the extension of SGML ISO 88791986 to Hypermedia within HyTime , but it was considered too expensive and had an inappropriate licensing policy for use in the general high energy physics community, namely a fee for each document and each document alteration.  citation needed  A NeXT Computer was used by Berners-Lee as the worlds first web server and also to write the first web browser , WorldWideWeb , in 1990. By Christmas 1990, Berners-Lee had built all the tools necessary for a working Web 15  the first web browser which was a web editor as well and the first web server. The first web site, 16  which described the project itself, was published on 20 December 1990. 17  The first web page may be lost, but Paul Jones of UNC-Chapel Hill in North Carolina announced in May 2013 that Berners-Lee gave him what he says is the oldest known web page during a 1991 visit to UNC. Jones stored it on a magneto-optical drive and on his NeXT computer. 18  On 6 August 1991, Berners-Lee published a short summary of the World Wide Web project on the newsgroup alt.hypertext . 19  This date is sometimes confused with the public availability of the first web servers, which had occurred months earlier. As another example of such confusion, several news media reported that the first photo on the Web was published by Berners-Lee in 1992, an image of the CERN house band Les Horribles Cernettes taken by Silvano de Gennaro Gennaro has disclaimed this story, writing that media were totally distorting our words for the sake of cheap sensationalism. 20  The first server outside Europe was installed at the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center SLAC in Palo Alto, California, to host the SPIRES -HEP database. Accounts differ substantially as to the date of this event. The World Wide Web Consortiums timeline says December 1992, 21  whereas SLAC itself claims December 1991, 22  23  as does a W3C document titled A Little History of the World Wide Web . 24  The underlying concept of hypertext originated in previous projects from the 1960s, such as the Hypertext Editing System HES at Brown University, Ted Nelson s Project Xanadu , and Douglas Engelbart s oN-Line System NLS. Both Nelson and Engelbart were in turn inspired by Vannevar Bush s microfilm -based memex , which was described in the 1945 essay  As We May Think . 25  Berners-Lees breakthrough was to marry hypertext to the Internet. In his book Weaving The Web , he explains that he had repeatedly suggested that a marriage between the two technologies was possible to members of both technical communities, but when no one took up his invitation, he finally assumed the project himself. In the process, he developed three essential technologies a system of globally unique identifiers for resources on the Web and elsewhere, the universal document identifier UDI, later known as uniform resource locator URL and uniform resource identifier URI the publishing language Hypertext Markup Language HTML the Hypertext Transfer Protocol HTTP. 26  The World Wide Web had several differences from other hypertext systems available at the time. The Web required only unidirectional links rather than bidirectional ones, making it possible for someone to link to another resource without action by the owner of that resource. It also significantly reduced the difficulty of implementing web servers and browsers in comparison to e arlier systems, but in turn presented the chronic problem of link rot . Unlike predecessors such as HyperCard , the World Wide Web was non-proprietary, making it possible to develop servers and clients independently and to add extensions without licensing restrictions. On 30 April 1993, CERN announced that the World Wide Web would be free to anyone, with no fees due. 27  Coming two months after the announcement that the server implementation of the Gopher protocol was no longer free to use, this produced a rapid shift away from Gopher and towards the Web. An early popular web browser was ViolaWWW for Unix and the X Window System . Robert Cailliau , Jean-Franois Abramatic, and Tim Berners-Lee at the 10th anniversary of the World Wide Web Consortium. Historians generally agree that a turning point for the Web began with the introduction 28  of the Mosaic web browser 29  in 1993, a graphical browser developed by a team at the National Center for Supercomputing Applications at the University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign NCSA-UIUC, led by Marc Andreessen . Funding for Mosaic came from the US High-Performance Computing and Communications Initiative and the High Performance Computing Act of 1991 , one of several computing developments initiated by US Senator Al Gore . 30  Prior to the release of Mosaic, graphics were not commonly mixed with text in web pages and the webs popularity was less than that of older protocols in use over the Internet, such as Gopher and Wide Area Information Servers WAIS. Mosaics graphical user interface allowed the Web to become, by far, the most popular Internet protocol. The World Wide Web Consortium W3C was founded by Tim Berners-Lee after he left the European Organization for Nuclear Research CERN in October 1994. It was founded at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Laboratory for Computer Science MITLCS with support from the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency DARPA, which had pioneered the Internet a year later, a second site was founded at INRIA a French national computer research lab with support from the European Commission DG InfSo and in 1996, a third continental site was created in Japan at Keio University . By the end of 1994, the total number of websites was still relatively small, but many notable websites were already active that foreshadowed or inspired todays most popular services. Connected by the Internet, other websites were created around the world. This motivated international standards development for protocols and formatting. Berners-Lee continued to stay involved in guiding the development of web standards, such as the markup languages to compose web pages and he advocated his vision of a Semantic Web . The World Wide Web enabled the spread of information over the Internet through an easy-to-use and flexible format. It thus played an important role in popularising use of the Internet. 31  Although the two terms are sometimes conflated in popular use, World Wide Web is not synonymous with Internet . 32  The Web is an information space containing hyperlinked documents and other resources , identified by their URIs. 33  It is implemented as both client and server software using Internet protocols such as TCPIP and HTTP . Berners-Lee was knighted in 2004 by Queen Elizabeth II for services to the global development of the Internet. 34  35  He never patented his invention. Function  edit  Main articles HTTP and HTML The World Wide Web functions as an application layer protocol that is run on top of figuratively the Internet, helping to make it more functional. The advent of the Mosaic web browser helped to make the web much more usable, to include the display of images and moving images  GIFs . The terms Internet and World Wide Web are often used without much distinction. However, the two terms do not mean the same thing. The Internet is a global system of interconnected computer networks . In contrast, the World Wide Web is a global collection of documents and other resources , linked by hyperlinks and URIs . Web resources are accessed using HTTP or HTTPS , which are application-level Internet protocols that use the Internets transport protocols. 36  Viewing a web page on the World Wide Web normally begins either by typing the URL of the page into a web browser, or by following a hyperlink to that page or resource. The web browser then initiates a series of background communication messages to fetch and display the requested page. In the 1990s, using a browser to view web pagesand to move from one web page to another through hyperlinkscame to be known as browsing, web surfing after channel surfing , or navigating the Web. Early studies of this new behaviour investigated user patterns in using web browsers. One study, for example, found five user patterns exploratory surfing, window surfing, evolved surfing, bounded navigation and targeted navigation. 37  The following example demonstrates the functioning of a web browser when accessing a page at the URL httpwww.example.orghome.html . The browser resolves the server name of the URL  www.example.org  into an Internet Protocol address using the globally distributed Domain Name System DNS. This lookup returns an IP address such as 203.0.113.4 or 2001db82e7334 . The browser then requests the resource by sending an HTTP request across the Internet to the computer at that address. It requests service from a specific TCP port number that is well known for the HTTP service, so that the receiving host can distinguish an HTTP request from other network protocols it may be servicing. The HTTP protocol normally uses port number 80 and for HTTPS protocol it normally is port number 443 . The content of the HTTP request can be as simple as two lines of text GET home.html HTTP  1.1 Host  www.example.org The computer receiving the HTTP request delivers it to web server software listening for requests on port 80. If the web server can fulfil the request it sends an HTTP response back to the browser indicating success HTTP  1.1 200 OK Content-Type  texthtml charsetUTF-8 followed by the content of the requested page. HyperText Markup Language  HTML  for a basic web page might look like this  html   head   title  www.Example.org  The World Wide Web  title   head   body   p  The World Wide Web, abbreviated as WWW and commonly known ...  p   body   html  The web browser parses the HTML and interprets the markup   title  ,  p  for paragraph, and such that surrounds the words to format the text on the screen. Many web pages use HTML to reference the URLs of other resources such as images, other embedded media, scripts that affect page behaviour, and Cascading Style Sheets that affect page layout. The browser makes additional HTTP requests to the web server for these other Internet media types . As it receives their content from the web server, the browser progressively renders the page onto the screen as specified by its HTML and these additional resources. HTML  edit  Main article HTML Hypertext Markup Language HTML is the standard markup language for creating web pages and web applications . With Cascading Style Sheets CSS and JavaScript , it forms a triad of cornerstone technologies for the World Wide Web. 38  Web browsers receive HTML documents from a web server or from local storage and render the documents into multimedia web pages. HTML describes the structure of a web page semantically and originally included cues for the appearance of the document. HTML elements are the building blocks of HTML pages. With HTML constructs, images and other objects such as interactive forms may be embedded into the rendered page. HTML provides a means to create structured documents by denoting structural semantics for text such as headings, paragraphs, lists, links , quotes and other items. HTML elements are delineated by tags , written using angle brackets . Tags such as  img   and  input   directly introduce content into the page. Other tags such as  p  surround and provide information about document text and may include other tags as sub-elements. Browsers do not display the HTML tags, but use them to interpret the content of the page. HTML can embed programs written in a scripting language such as JavaScript , which affects the behavior and content of web pages. Inclusion of CSS defines the look and layout of content. The World Wide Web Consortium W3C, maintainer of both the HTML and the CSS standards, has encouraged the use of CSS over explicit presentational HTML since 1997. update  39  Linking  edit  Most web pages contain hyperlinks to other related pages and perhaps to downloadable files, source documents, definitions and other web resources. In the underlying HTML, a hyperlink looks like this  a href  httpwww.example.orghome.html   www.Example.org Homepage  a  Graphic representation of a minute fraction of the WWW, demonstrating hyperlinks Such a collection of useful, related resources, interconnected via hypertext links is dubbed a web of information. Publication on the Internet created what Tim Berners-Lee first called the WorldWideWeb in its original CamelCase , which was subsequently discarded in November 1990. 13  The hyperlink structure of the WWW is described by the webgraph  the nodes of the web graph correspond to the web pages or URLs the directed edges between them to the hyperlinks. Over time, many web resources pointed to by hyperlinks disappear, relocate, or are replaced with different content. This makes hyperlinks obsolete, a phenomenon referred to in some circles as link rot, and the hyperlinks affected by it are often called dead links . The ephemeral nature of the Web has prompted many efforts to archive web sites. The Internet Archive , active since 1996, is the best known of such efforts. WWW prefix  edit  Many hostnames used for the World Wide Web begin with www because of the long-standing practice of naming Internet hosts according to the services they provide. The hostname of a web server is often www , in the same way that it may be ftp for an FTP server , and news or nntp for a Usenet news server . These host names appear as Domain Name System DNS or subdomain names, as in www.example.com . The use of www is not required by any technical or policy standard and many web sites do not use it the first web server was nxoc01.cern.ch . 40  According to Paolo Palazzi, 41  who worked at CERN along with Tim Berners-Lee, the popular use of www as subdomain was accidental the World Wide Web project page was intended to be published at www.cern.ch while info.cern.ch was intended to be the CERN home page, however the DNS records were never switched, and the practice of prepending www to an institutions website domain name was subsequently copied. Many established websites still use the prefix, or they employ other subdomain names such as www2 , secure or en for special purposes. Many such web servers are set up so that both the main domain name e.g., example.com and the www subdomain e.g., www.example.com refer to the same site others require one form or the other, or they may map to different web sites. The use of a subdomain name is useful for load balancing incoming web traffic by creating a CNAME record that points to a cluster of web servers. Since, currently, only a subdomain can be used in a CNAME, the same result cannot be achieved by using the bare domain root. 42   dubious  discuss  When a user submits an incomplete domain name to a web browser in its address bar input field, some web browsers automatically try adding the prefix www to the beginning of it and possibly .com, .org and .net at the end, depending on what might be missing. For example, entering microsoft may be transformed to httpwww.microsoft.com and openoffice to httpwww.openoffice.org . This feature started appearing in early versions of Firefox , when it still had the working title Firebird in early 2003, from an earlier practice in browsers such as Lynx . 43   unreliable source  It is reported that Microsoft was granted a US patent for the same idea in 2008, but only for mobile devices. 44  In English, www is usually read as double-u double-u double-u . 45  Some users pronounce it dub-dub-dub , particularly in New Zealand. Stephen Fry, in his Podgrams series of podcasts, pronounces it wuh wuh wuh . 46  The English writer Douglas Adams once quipped in The Independent on Sunday 1999 The World Wide Web is the only thing I know of whose shortened form takes three times longer to say than what its short for. 47  In Mandarin Chinese, World Wide Web is commonly translated via a phono-semantic matching to wn wi wng   , which satisfies www and literally means myriad dimensional net, 48   better  source  needed  a translation that reflects the design concept and proliferation of the World Wide Web. Tim Berners-Lees web-space states that World Wide Web is officially spelled as three separate words, each capitalised, with no intervening hyphens. 49  Use of the www prefix has been declining, especially when Web 2.0 web applications sought to brand their domain names and make them easily pronounceable. 50  As the mobile Web grew in popularity, services like Gmail .com, Outlook.com , Myspace .com, Facebook .com and Twitter .com are most often mentioned without adding www. or, indeed, .com to the domain. Scheme specifiers  edit  The scheme specifiers http and https at the start of a web URI refer to Hypertext Transfer Protocol or HTTP Secure , respectively. They specify the communication protocol to use for the request and response. The HTTP protocol is fundamental to the operation of the World Wide Web, and the added encryption layer in HTTPS is essential when browsers send or retrieve confidential data, such as passwords or banking information. Web browsers usually automatically prepend http to user-entered U RIs, if omitted. Page  edit  Main article Web page A screenshot of a web page on Wikimedia Commons A web page also written as webpage  is a document that is suitable for the World Wide Web and web browsers . A web browser displays a web page on a monitor or mobile device . The term web page usually refers to what is visible, but may also refer to the contents of the computer file itself, which is usually a text file containing hypertext written in HTML or a comparable markup language . Typical web pages provide hypertext for browsing to other web pages via hyperlinks , often referred to as links . Web browsers will frequently have to access multiple web resource elements, such as reading style sheets , scripts , and images, while presenting each web page. On a network, a web browser can retrieve a web page from a remote web server . The web server may restrict access to a private network such as a corporate intranet. The web browser uses the Hypertext Transfer Protocol HTTP to make such requests to the web server . A static web page is delivered exactly as stored, as web content in the web servers file system . In contrast, a dynamic web page is generated by a web application , usually driven by server-side software . Dynamic web pages help the browser the client  to enhance the web page through user input to the server. Static page  edit  Main article Static web page A static web page sometimes called a flat pagestationary page  is a web page that is delivered to the user exactly as stored, in contrast to dynamic web pages which are generated by a web application . Consequently, a static web page displays the same information for all users, from all contexts, subject to modern capabilities of a web server to negotiate content-type or language of the document where such versions are available and the server is configured to do so. Dynamic pages  edit  Main articles Dynamic web page and Ajax programming Dynamic web page example of server-side scripting  PHP and MySQL . A server-side dynamic web page is a web page whose construction is controlled by an application server processing server-side scripts. In server-side scripting, parameters determine how the assembly of every new web page proceeds, including the setting up of more client-side processing. A client-side dynamic web page processes the web page using HTML scripting running in the browser as it loads. JavaScript and other scripting languages determine the way the HTML in the received page is parsed into the Document Object Model , or DOM, that represents the loaded web page. The same client-side techniques can then dynamically update or change the DOM in the same way. A dynamic web page is then reloaded by the user or by a computer program to change some variable content. The updating information could come from the server, or from changes made to that pages DOM. This may or may not truncate the browsing history or create a saved version to go back to, but a dynamic web page update using Ajax technologies will neither create a page to go back to, nor truncate the web browsing history forward of the displayed page. Using Ajax technologies the end user gets one dynamic page managed as a single page in the web browser while the actual web content rendered on that page can vary. The Ajax engine sits only on the browser requesting parts of its DOM, the DOM, for its client, from an application server. DHTML is the umbrella term for technologies and methods used to create web pages that are not static web pages , though it has fallen out of common use since the popularization of AJAX , a term which is now itself rarely used. Client-side-scripting, server-side scripting, or a combination of these make for the dynamic web experience in a browser. JavaScript is a scripting language that was initially developed in 1995 by Brendan Eich , then of Netscape , for use within web pages. 51  The standardised version is ECMAScript . 51  To make web pages more interactive, some web applications also use JavaScript techniques such as Ajax  asynchronous JavaScript and XML . Client-side script is delivered with the page that can make additional HTTP requests to the server, either in response to user actions such as mouse movements or clicks, or based on elapsed time. The servers responses are used to modify the current page rather than creating a new page with each response, so the server needs only to provide limited, incremental information. Multiple Ajax request s can be handled at the same time, and users can interact with the page while data is retrieved. Web pages may also regularly poll the server to check whether new information is available. 52  Website  edit  The usap.gov website Main article website A website 53  is a collection of related web resources including web pages , multimedia content, typically identified with a common domain name , and published on at least one web server . Notable examples are wikipedia .org, google .com, and amazon.com . A website may be accessible via a public Internet Protocol IP network, such as the Internet , or a private local area network LAN, by referencing a uniform resource locator URL that identifies the site. Websites can have many functions and can be used in various fashions a website can be a personal website , a corporate website for a company, a government website, an organization website, etc. Websites are typically dedicated to a particular topic or purpose, ranging from entertainment and social networking to providing news and education. All publicly accessible websites collectively constitute the World Wide Web, while private websites, such as a companys website for its employees, are typically a part of an intranet . Web pages, which are the building blocks of websites, are documents , typically composed in plain text interspersed with formatting instructions of Hypertext Markup Language  HTML , XHTML . They may incorporate elements from other websites with suitable markup anchors . Web pages are accessed and transported with the Hypertext Transfer Protocol HTTP, which may optionally employ encryption  HTTP Secure , HTTPS to provide security and privacy for the user. The users application, often a web browser , renders the page content according to its HTML markup instructions onto a display terminal . Hyperlinking between web pages conveys to the reader the site structure and guides the navigation of the site, which often starts with a home page containing a directory of the site web content . Some websites require user registration or subscription to access content. Examples of subscription websites include many business sites, news websites, academic journal websites, gaming websites, file-sharing websites, message boards , web-based email , social networking websites, websites providing real-time stock market data, as well as sites providing various other services. End users can access websites on a range of devices, including desktop and laptop computers , tablet computers , smartphones and smart TVs . Browser  edit  Main article Web browser A web browser commonly referred to as a browser  is a software user agent for accessing information on the World Wide Web. To connect to a websites server and display its pages, a user needs to have a web browser program. This is the program that the user runs to download, format and display a web page on the users computer. 54  In addition to allowing users to find, displaying and moving between web pages, a web browser will usually have features like keeping bookmarks, recording history, managing cookies see below and home pages and may have facilities for recording passwords for logging into web sites. The most popular browsers are Chrome , Firefox , Safari , Internet Explorer , and Edge . Server  edit  Main article Web server The inside and front of a Dell PowerEdge web server, a computer designed for rack mounting A Web server is server software , or hardware dedicated to running said software, that can satisfy World Wide Web client requests. A web server can, in general, contain one or more websites. A web server processes incoming network requests over HTTP and several other related protocols. The primary function of a web server is to store, process and deliver web pages to clients . 55  The communication between client and server takes place using the Hypertext Transfer Protocol HTTP . Pages delivered are most frequently HTML documents , which may include images , style sheets and scripts in addition to the text content. Multiple web servers may be used for a high traffic website here, Dell servers are installed together being used for the Wikimedia Foundation . A user agent , commonly a web browser or web crawler , initiates communication by making a request for a specific resource using HTTP and the server responds with the content of that resource or an error message if unable to do so. The resource is typically a real file on the servers secondary storage , but this is not necessarily the case and depends on how the web server is implemented . While the primary function is to serve content, a full implementation of HTTP also includes ways of receiving content from clients. This feature is used for submitting web forms , including uploading of files. Many generic web servers also support server-side scripting using Active Server Pages ASP, PHP Hypertext Preprocessor, or other scripting languages . This means that the behaviour of the web server can be scripted in separate files, while the actual server software remains unchanged. Usually, this function is used to generate HTML documents dynamically on-the-fly as opposed to returning static documents . The former is primarily used for retrieving or modifying information from databases . The latter is typically much faster and more easily cached but cannot deliver dynamic content . Web servers can also frequently be found embedded in devices such as printers , routers , webcams and serving only a local network . The web server may then be used as a part of a system for monitoring or administering the device in question. This usually means that no additional software has to be installed on the client computer since only a web browser is required which now is included with most operating systems . Cookie  edit  Main article HTTP cookie An HTTP cookie also called web cookie , Internet cookie , browser cookie , or simply cookie  is a small piece of data sent from a website and stored on the users computer by the users web browser while the user is browsing. Cookies were designed to be a reliable mechanism for websites to remember stateful information such as items added in the shopping cart in an online store or to record the users browsing activity including clicking particular buttons, logging in , or recording which pages were visited in the past. They can also be used to remember arbitrary pieces of information that the user previously entered into form fields such as names, addresses, passwords, and credit card numbers. Cookies perform essential functions in the modern web. Perhaps most importantly, authentication cookies are the most common method used by web servers to know whether the user is logged in or not, and which account they are logged in with. Without such a mechanism, the site would not know whether to send a page containing sensitive information, or require the user to authenticate themselves by logging in. The security of an authentication cookie generally depends on the security of the issuing website and the users web browser , and on whether the cookie data is encrypted. Security vulnerabilities may allow a cookies data to be read by a hacker , used to gain access to user data, or used to gain access with the users credentials to the website to which the cookie belongs see cross-site scripting and cross-site request forgery for examples. 56  Tracking cookies, and especially third-party tracking cookies , are commonly used as ways to compile long-term records of individuals browsing histories  a potential privacy concern that prompted European 57  and U.S. lawmakers to take action in 2011. 58  59  European law requires that all websites targeting European Union member states gain informed consent from users before storing non-essential cookies on their device. Google Project Zero researcher Jann Horn describes ways cookies can be read by intermediaries , like Wi-Fi hotspot providers. He recommends to use the browser in incognito mode in such circumstances. 60  Search engine  edit  Main article Search engine The results of a search for the term lunar eclipse in a web-based image search engine A web search engine or Internet search engine is a software system that is designed to carry out web search  Internet search , which means to search the World Wide Web in a systematic way for particular information specified in a web search query . The search results are generally presented in a line of results, often referred to as search engine results pages SERPs. The information may be a mix of web pages , images, videos, infographics, articles, research papers and other types of files. Some search engines also mine data available in databases or open directories . Unlike web directories , which are maintained only by human editors, search engines also maintain real-time information by running an algorithm on a web crawler . Internet content that is not capable of being searched by a web search engine is generally described as the deep web . Deep web  edit  Main article Deep web The deep web, 61  invisible web , 62  or hidden web 63  are parts of the World Wide Web whose contents are not indexed by standard web search engines . The opposite term to the deep web is the surface web , which is accessible to anyone using the Internet. 64  Computer scientist Michael K. Bergman is credited with coining the term deep web in 2001 as a search indexing term. 65  The content of the deep web is hidden behind HTTP forms, 66  67  and includes many very common uses such as web mail , online banking , and services that users must pay for, and which is protected by a paywall , such as video on demand , some online magazines and newspapers, among others. The content of the deep web can be located and accessed by a direct URL or IP address , and may require a password or other security access past the public website page. Caching  edit  A web cache is a server computer located either on the public Internet, or within an enterprise that stores recently accessed web pages to improve response time for users when the same content is requested within a certain time after the original request. Most web browsers also implement a browser cache by writing recently obtained data to a local data storage device. HTTP requests by a browser may ask only for data that has changed since the last access. Web pages and resources may contain expiration information to control caching to secure sensitive data, such as in online banking , or to facilitate frequently updated sites, such as news media. Even sites with highly dynamic content may permit basic resources to be refreshed only occasionally. Web site designers find it worthwhile to collate resources such as CSS data and JavaScript into a few site-wide files so that they can be cached efficiently. Enterprise firewalls often cache Web resources requested by one user for the benefit of many users. Some search engines store cached content of frequently accessed websites. Security  edit  For criminals , the Web has become a venue to spread malware and engage in a range of cybercrimes , including identity theft , fraud , espionage and intelligence gathering . 68  Web-based vulnerabilities now outnumber traditional computer security concerns, 69  70  and as measured by Google , about one in ten web pages may contain malicious code. 71  Most web-based attacks take place on legitimate websites, and most, as measured by Sophos , are hosted in the United States, China and Russia. 72  The most common of all malware threats is SQL injection attacks against websites. 73  Through HTML and URIs, the Web was vulnerable to attacks like cross-site scripting XSS that came with the introduction of JavaScript 74  and were exacerbated to some degree by Web 2.0 and Ajax web design that favours the use of scripts. 75  Today by one estimate, 70 of all websites are open to XSS attacks on their users. 76  Phishing is another common threat to the Web. In February 2013, RSA the security division of EMC estimated the global losses from phishing at 1.5  billion in 2012. 77  Two of the well-known phishing methods are Covert Redirect and Open Redirect. Proposed solutions vary. Large security companies like McAfee already design governance and compliance suites to meet post-911 regulations, 78  and some, like Finjan have recommended active real-time inspection of programming code and all content regardless of its source. 68  Some have argued that for enterprises to see Web security as a business opportunity rather than a cost centre , 79  while others call for ubiquitous, always-on digital rights management  enforced in the infrastructure to replace the hundreds of companies that secure data and networks. 80  Jonathan Zittrain has said users sharing responsibility for computing safety is far preferable to locking down the Internet. 81  Privacy  edit  Main article Internet privacy Every time a client requests a web page, the server can identify the requests IP address and usually logs it. Also, unless set not to do so, most web browsers record requested web pages in a viewable history feature, and usually cache much of the content locally. Unless the server-browser communication uses HTTPS encryption, web requests and responses travel in plain text across the Internet and can be viewed, recorded, and cached by intermediate systems. Another way to hide personally identifiable information is by using a VPN . A VPN encrypts online traffic and masks original IP address lowering the chance of user identification. When a web page asks for, and the user supplies, personally identifiable informationsuch as their real name, address, e-mail address, etc.web-based entities can associate current web traffic with that individual. If the website uses HTTP cookies , username and password authentication, or other tracking techniques, it can relate other web visits, before and after, to the identifiable information provided. In this way it is possible for a web-based organisation to develop and build a profile of the individual people who use its site or sites. It may be able to build a record for an individual that includes information ab out their leisure activities, their shopping interests, their profession, and other aspects of their demographic profile . These profiles are obviously of potential interest to marketeers, advertisers and others. Depending on the websites terms and conditions and the local laws that apply information from these profiles may be sold, shared, or passed to other organisations without the user being informed. For many ordinary people, this means little more than some unexpected e-mails in their in-box or some uncannily relevant advertising on a future web page. For others, it can mean that time spent indulging an unusual interest can r esult in a deluge of further targeted marketing that may be unwelcome. Law enforcement, counter terrorism, and espionage agencies can also identify, target and track individuals based on their interests or proclivities on the Web. Social networking sites try to get users to use their real names, interests, and locations, rather than pseudonyms, as their executives believe that this makes the social networking experience more engaging for users. On the other hand, uploaded photographs or unguarded statements can be identified to an individual, who may regret this exposure. Employers, schools, parents, and other relatives may be influenced by aspects of social networking profiles, such as text posts or digital photos, that the posting individual did not intend for these audiences. On-line bullies may make use of personal information to harass or stalk users. Modern social networking websites allow fine grained control of the privacy settings for each individual posting, but these can be complex and not easy to find or use, especially for beginners. 82  Photographs and videos posted onto websites have caused particular problems, as they can add a persons face to an on-line profile. With modern and potential facial recognition technology , it may then be possible to relate that face with other, previously anonymous, images, events and scenarios that have been imaged elsewhere. Due to image caching, mirroring and copying, it is difficult to remove an image from the World Wide Web. Standards  edit  Main article Web standards Web standards include many interdependent standards and specifications, some of which govern aspects of the Internet , not just the World Wide Web. Even when not web-focused, such standards directly or indirectly affect the development and administration of web sites and web services . Considerations include the interoperability , accessibility and usability of web pages and web sites. Web standards, in the broader sense, consist of the following Recommendations published by the World Wide Web Consortium W3C 83  Living Standard made by the Web Hypertext Application Technology Working Group WHATWG Request for Comments RFC documents published by the Internet Engineering Task Force IETF 84  Standards published by the International Organization for Standardization ISO 85  Standards published by Ecma International formerly ECMA 86  The Unicode Standard and various Unicode Technical Reports UTRs published by the Unicode Consortium 87  Name and number registries maintained by the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority IANA 88  Web standards are not fixed sets of rules, but are a constantly evolving set of finalized technical specifications of web technologies. 89  Web standards are developed by standards organizations groups of interested and often competing parties chartered with the task of standardizationnot technologies developed and declared to be a standard by a single individual or company. It is crucial to distinguish those specifications that are under development from the ones that already reached the final development status in case of W3C specifications, the highest maturity level. Accessibility  edit  Main article Web accessibility There are methods for accessing the Web in alternative mediums and formats to facilitate use by individuals with disabilities . These disabilities may be visual, auditory, physical, speech-related, cognitive, neurological, or some combination. Accessibility features also help people with temporary disabilities, like a broken arm, or ageing users as their abilities change. 90  The Web receives information as well as providing information and interacting with society. The World Wide Web Consortium claims that it is essential that the Web be accessible, so it can provide equal access and equal opportunity to people with disabilities. 91  Tim Berners-Lee once noted, The power of the Web is in its universality. Access by everyone regardless of disability is an essential aspect. 90  Many countries regulate web accessibility as a requirement for websites. 92  International co-operation in the W3C Web Accessibility Initiative led to simple guidelines that web content authors as well as software developers can use to make the Web accessible to persons who may or may not be using assistive technology . 90  93  Internationalisation  edit  The W3C Internationalisation Activity assures that web technology works in all languages, scripts, and cultures. 94  Beginning in 2004 or 2005, Unicode gained ground and eventually in December 2007 surpassed both ASCII and Western European as the Webs most frequently used character encoding . 95  Originally .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em RFC   3986 allowed resources to be identified by URI in a subset of US-ASCII. RFC   3987 allows more charactersany character in the Universal Character Set and now a resource can be identified by IRI in any language. 96  See also  edit  Electronic publishing Internet metaphors Internet security Lists of websites Prestel Streaming media Web development tools Web literacy World Wide Telecom Web Computer Science portal Engineering portal Internet portal References  edit   What is the difference between the Web and the Internet . W3C Help and FAQ . W3C . 2009. Archived from the original on 9 July 2015 . Retrieved 16 July 2015 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   McPherson, Stephanie Sammartino 2009. Tim Berners-Lee Inventor of the World Wide Web . Twenty-First Century Books. ISBN   978-0-8225-7273-2 . Archived from the original on 15 April 2016. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Quittner, Joshua 29 March 1999. Network Designer Tim Berners-Lee . Time Magazine . Archived from the original on 15 August 2007 . Retrieved 17 May 2010 . He wove the World Wide Web and created a mass medium for the 21st century. The World Wide Web is Berners-Lees alone. He designed it. He set it loose it on the world. And he more than anyone else has fought to keep it an open, non-proprietary and free. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   page  needed   World Wide Web Timeline . Pew Research Center . 11 March 2014. Archived from the original on 29 July 2015 . Retrieved 1 August 2015 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Dewey, Caitlin 12 March 2014. 36 Ways the Web Has Changed Us . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 9 September 2015 . Retrieved 1 August 2015 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Internet Live Stats . Archived from the original on 2 July 2015 . Retrieved 1 August 2015 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Joseph Adamski Kathy Finnegan 2007. New Perspectives on Microsoft Office Access 2007, Comprehensive . Cengage Learning. p.  390. ISBN   978-1-4239-0589-9 .  Enzer, Larry 31 August 2018. The Evolution of the World Wide Web . Monmouth Web Developers . Archived from the original on 18 November 2018 . Retrieved 31 August 2018 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   Archived copy PDF . Archived from the original PDF on 17 November 2015 . Retrieved 26 August 2015 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  CS1 maint archived copy as title  link   May, Ashley 12 March 2019. Happy 30th birthday, World Wide Web. Inventor outlines plan to combat hacking, hate speech . USA Today . Retrieved 12 March 2019 .  Aja Romano 12 March 2019. The World Wide Web  not the Internet  turns 30 years old . Vox.com .  Berners-Lee, Tim March 1989. Information Management A Proposal . W3C. Archived from the original on 15 March 2009 . Retrieved 27 July 2009 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   a b Berners-Lee, Tim  Cailliau, Robert 12 November 1990. WorldWideWeb Proposal for a HyperText Project . Archived from the original on 2 May 2015 . Retrieved 12 May 2015 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Tim Berners-Lees original World Wide Web browser . Archived from the original on 17 July 2011. With recent phenomena like blogs and wikis, the Web is beginning to develop the kind of collaborative nature that its inventor envisaged from the start. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Tim Berners-Lee client . W3.org. Archived from the original on 21 July 2009 . Retrieved 27 July 2009 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   First Web pages . W3.org. Archived from the original on 31 January 2010 . Retrieved 27 July 2009 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   The birth of the web . CERN. Archived from the original on 24 December 2015 . Retrieved 23 December 2015 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Murawski, John 24 May 2013. Hunt for worlds oldest WWW page leads to UNC Chapel Hill . News  Observer . Archived from the original on 8 June 2013. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Short summary of the World Wide Web project . 6 August 1991 . Retrieved 27 July 2009 .  Silvano de Gennaro disclaims the first photo on the Web   . Archived from the original on 4 August 2012 . Retrieved 27 July 2012 . If you read well our website, it says that it was, to our knowledge, the first photo of a band. Dozens of media are totally distorting our words for the sake of cheap sensationalism. Nobody knows which was the first photo on the Web. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   W3C timeline . Archived from the original on 31 March 2010 . Retrieved 30 March 2010 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   The Early World Wide Web at SLAC . Archived from the original on 24 November 2005. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   About SPIRES . Archived from the original on 12 February 2010 . Retrieved 30 March 2010 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   A Little History of the World Wide Web . Archived from the original on 6 May 2013. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Conklin, Jeff 1987, IEEE Computer , 20 , pp.  1741  Inventor of the Week Archive The World Wide Web . Massachusetts Institute of Technology  MIT School of Engineering. Archived from the original on 8 June 2010 . Retrieved 23 July 2009 .  Ten Years Public Domain for the Original Web Software . Tenyears-www.web.cern.ch. 30 April 2003. Archived from the original on 13 August 2009 . Retrieved 27 July 2009 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Mosaic Web Browser History   NCSA, Marc Andreessen, Eric Bina . Livinginternet.com . Retrieved 27 July 2009 .  NCSA Mosaic   September 10, 1993 Demo . Totic.org . Retrieved 27 July 2009 .  Vice President Al Gores ENIAC Anniversary Speech . Cs.washington.edu. 14 February 1996. Archived from the original on 20 February 2009 . Retrieved 27 July 2009 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Internet legal definition of Internet . Wests Encyclopedia of American Law, edition 2 . Free Online Law Dictionary. 15 July 2009 . Retrieved 25 November 2008 .  WWW World Wide Web Definition . TechTerms. Archived from the original on 11 May 2009 . Retrieved 19 February 2010 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Jacobs, Ian Walsh, Norman 15 December 2004. Architecture of the World Wide Web, Volume One . Introduction W3C. Archived from the original on 9 February 2015 . Retrieved 11 February 2015 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Supplement no.1, Diplomatic and Overseas List, K.B.E. PDF . thegazette.co.uk . The Gazette. 31 December 2003. Archived PDF from the original on 3 February 2016 . Retrieved 7 February 2016 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Webs inventor gets a knighthood . BBC. 31 December 2003. Archived from the original on 23 December 2007 . Retrieved 25 May 2008 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   What is the difference between the Web and the Internet . World Wide Web Consortium. Archived from the original on 22 April 2016 . Retrieved 18 April 2016 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Muylle, Steve Rudy Moenaert Marc Despont 1999. A grounded theory of World Wide Web search behaviour . Journal of Marketing Communications . 5 3 143. doi  10.1080135272699345644 . Archived from the original on 20 October 2014. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Flanagan, David. JavaScript  The definitive guide 6 ed.. p.  1. JavaScript is part of the triad of technologies that all Web developers must learn HTML to specify the content of web pages, CSS to specify the presentation of web pages, and JavaScript to specify the behaviour of web pages.  HTML 4.0 Specification  W3C Recommendation  Conformance requirements and recommendations . World Wide Web Consortium. 18 December 1997 . Retrieved 6 July 2015 .  Berners-Lee, Tim. Frequently asked questions by the Press . W3C. Archived from the original on 2 August 2009 . Retrieved 27 July 2009 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Palazzi, P 2011 The Early Days of the WWW at CERN Archived 23 July 2012 at the Wayback Machine  Dominic Fraser 13 May 2018. Why a domains root cant be a CNAME  and other tidbits about the DNS . FreeCodeCamp .  automatically adding www.___.com . mozillaZine. 16 May 2003. Archived from the original on 27 June 2009 . Retrieved 27 May 2009 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Masnick, Mike 7 July 2008. Microsoft Patents Adding www. And .com To Text . Techdirt. Archived from the original on 27 June 2009 . Retrieved 27 May 2009 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Audible pronunciation of WWW   . Oxford University Press. Archived from the original on 25 May 2014 . Retrieved 25 May 2014 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Stephen Frys pronunciation of WWW   . Podcasts.com. Archived from the original on 4 April 2017. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Simonite, Tom 22 July 2008. Help us find a better way to pronounce www . newscientist.com . New Scientist, Technology. Archived from the original on 13 March 2016 . Retrieved 7 February 2016 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  Italic or bold markup not allowed in publisher  help   MDBG Chinese-English dictionary   Translate . Archived from the original on 12 November 2008 . Retrieved 27 July 2009 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Frequently asked questions by the Press   Tim BL . W3.org. Archived from the original on 2 August 2009 . Retrieved 27 July 2009 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Castelluccio, Michael 2010. Its not your grandfathers Internet . thefreelibrary.com . Institute of Management Accountants . Retrieved 7 February 2016 .  a b Hamilton, Naomi 31 July 2008. The A-Z of Programming Languages JavaScript . Computerworld . IDG. Archived from the original on 24 May 2009 . Retrieved 12 May 2009 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Buntin, Seth 23 September 2008. jQuery Polling plugin . Archived from the original on 13 August 2009 . Retrieved 22 August 2009 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   website . TheFreeDictionary.com . Retrieved 2 July 2011 .  Difference Between Search Engine and Browser .  Patrick, Killelea 2002. Web performance tuning 2nd ed.. Beijing OReilly. p.  264. ISBN   978-0596001728 . OCLC   49502686 .  Vamosi, Robert 14 April 2008. Gmail cookie stolen via Google Spreadsheets . News.cnet.com . Retrieved 19 October 2017 .  What about the EU Cookie Directive . WebCookies.org. 2013 . Retrieved 19 October 2017 .  New net rules set to make cookies crumble . BBC . 8 March 2011.  Sen. Rockefeller Get Ready for a Real Do-Not-Track Bill for Online Advertising . Adage.com . 6 May 2011.  Want to use my wifi , Jann Horn, accessed 2018-01-05.  Hamilton, Nigel. The Mechanics of a Deep Net Metasearch Engine. CiteSeerX   10.1.1.90.5847 . Cite journal requires journal  help   Devine, Jane Egger-Sider, Francine July 2004. Beyond google the invisible web in the academic library. The Journal of Academic Librarianship . 30 4 265269. doi  10.1016j.acalib.2004.04.010 .  Raghavan, Sriram Garcia-Molina, Hector 1114 September 2001. Crawling the Hidden Web . 27th International Conference on Very Large Data Bases .  Surface Web . Computer Hope . Retrieved 20 June 2018 .  Wright, Alex 22 February 2009. Exploring a Deep Web That Google Cant Grasp . The New York Times . Retrieved 23 February 2009 .  Madhavan, J., Ko, D., Kot, ., Ganapathy, V., Rasmussen, A.,  Halevy, A. 2008. Googles deep web crawl. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 12, 124152.  Shedden, Sam 8 June 2014. How Do You Want Me to Do It Does It Have to Look like an Accident  an Assassin Selling a Hit on the Net Revealed Inside the Deep Web . Sunday Mail . Retrieved 5 May 2017  via Questia .  a b Ben-Itzhak, Yuval 18 April 2008. Infosecurity 2008  New defence strategy in battle against e-crime . ComputerWeekly . Reed Business Information. Archived from the original on 4 June 2008 . Retrieved 20 April 2008 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Christey, Steve  Martin, Robert A. 22 May 2007. Vulnerability Type Distributions in CVE version 1.1 . MITRE Corporation . Archived from the original on 17 March 2013 . Retrieved 7 June 2008 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Symantec Internet Security Threat Report Trends for JulyDecember 2007 Executive Summary PDF . XIII . Symantec Corp. April 2008 12. Archived PDF from the original on 25 June 2008 . Retrieved 11 May 2008 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  Cite journal requires journal  help   Google searches webs dark side . BBC News . 11 May 2007. Archived from the original on 7 March 2008 . Retrieved 26 April 2008 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Security Threat Report Q1 2008 PDF . Sophos. Archived PDF from the original on 31 December 2013 . Retrieved 24 April 2008 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Security threat report PDF . Sophos. July 2008. Archived PDF from the original on 31 December 2013 . Retrieved 24 August 2008 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Fogie, Seth, Jeremiah Grossman, Robert Hansen, and Anton Rager 2007. Cross Site Scripting Attacks XSS Exploits and Defense PDF . Syngress, Elsevier Science  Technology. pp.  6869, 127. ISBN   978-1-59749-154-9 . Archived from the original PDF on 25 June 2008 . Retrieved 6 June 2008 . CS1 maint multiple names authors list  link   OReilly, Tim 30 September 2005. What Is Web 2.0 . OReilly Media. pp.  45. Archived from the original on 15 April 2013 . Retrieved 4 June 2008 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  and AJAX web applications can introduce security vulnerabilities like client-side security controls, increased attack surfaces, and new possibilities for Cross-Site Scripting XSS, in Ritchie, Paul March 2007. The security risks of AJAXweb 2.0 applications PDF . Infosecurity . Archived from the original PDF on 25 June 2008 . Retrieved 6 June 2008 . which cites Hayre, Jaswinder S.  Kelath, Jayasankar 22 June 2006. Ajax Security Basics . SecurityFocus. Archived from the original on 15 May 2008 . Retrieved 6 June 2008 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Berinato, Scott 1 January 2007. Software Vulnerability Disclosure The Chilling Effect . CSO . CXO Media . p.  7. Archived from the original on 18 April 2008 . Retrieved 7 June 2008 .  2012 Global Losses From phishing Estimated At 1.5 Bn . FirstPost. 20 February 2013. Archived from the original on 21 December 2014 . Retrieved 25 January 2019 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Prince, Brian 9 April 2008. McAfee Governance, Risk and Compliance Business Unit . eWEEK . Ziff Davis Enterprise Holdings . Retrieved 25 April 2008 .  Preston, Rob 12 April 2008. Down To Business Its Past Time To Elevate The Infosec Conversation . InformationWeek . United Business Media. Archived from the original on 14 April 2008 . Retrieved 25 April 2008 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Claburn, Thomas 6 February 2007. RSAs Coviello Predicts Security Consolidation . InformationWeek . United Business Media. Archived from the original on 7 February 2009 . Retrieved 25 April 2008 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Duffy Marsan, Carolyn 9 April 2008. How the iPhone is killing the Net . Network World . IDG. Archived from the original on 14 April 2008 . Retrieved 17 April 2008 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   boyd, danah Hargittai, Eszter July 2010. Facebook privacy settings Who cares. First Monday . 15 8. doi  10.5210fm.v15i8.3086 .  W3C Technical Reports and Publications . W3C . Retrieved 19 January 2009 .  IETF RFC page . IETF. Archived from the original on 2 February 2009 . Retrieved 19 January 2009 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   Search for World Wide Web in ISO standards . ISO . Retrieved 19 January 2009 .  Ecma formal publications . Ecma . Retrieved 19 January 2009 .  Unicode Technical Reports . Unicode Consortium . Retrieved 19 January 2009 .  IANA home page . IANA . Retrieved 19 January 2009 .  Leslie Sikos 2011. Web standards  Mastering HTML5, CSS3, and XML . Apress . ISBN   978-1-4302-4041-9 .  a b c Web Accessibility Initiative WAI . World Wide Web Consortium. Archived from the original on 2 April 2009 . Retrieved 7 April 2009 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Developing a Web Accessibility Business Case for Your Organization Overview . World Wide Web Consortium. Archived from the original on 14 April 2009 . Retrieved 7 April 2009 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Legal and Policy Factors in Developing a Web Accessibility Business Case for Your Organization . World Wide Web Consortium. Archived from the original on 5 April 2009 . Retrieved 7 April 2009 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Web Content Accessibility Guidelines WCAG Overview . World Wide Web Consortium. Archived from the original on 1 April 2009 . Retrieved 7 April 2009 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Internationalization I18n Activity . World Wide Web Consortium. Archived from the original on 16 April 2009 . Retrieved 10 April 2009 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Davis, Mark 5 April 2008. Moving to Unicode 5.1 . Google. Archived from the original on 21 May 2009 . Retrieved 10 April 2009 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   World Wide Web Consortium Supports the IETF URI Standard and IRI Proposed Standard Press release. World Wide Web Consortium. 26 January 2005. Archived from the original on 7 February 2009 . Retrieved 10 April 2009 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  Further reading  edit  Berners-Lee, Tim Bray, Tim Connolly, Dan Cotton, Paul Fielding, Roy Jeckle, Mario Lilley, Chris Mendelsohn, Noah Orchard, David Walsh, Norman Williams, Stuart 15 December 2004. Architecture of the World Wide Web, Volume One . Version 20041215. W3C. Cite journal requires journal  help  Berners-Lee, Tim August 1996. The World Wide Web Past, Present and Future . Cite journal requires journal  help  Fielding, R. Gettys, J. Mogul, J. Frystyk, H. Masinter, L. Leach, P. Berners-Lee, T. June 1999. Hypertext Transfer Protocol   HTTP1.1. Request For Comments 2616. Information Sciences Institute. Cite journal requires journal  help  Niels Brgger, ed. Web History 2010 362 pages Historical perspective on the World Wide Web, including issues of culture, content, and preservation. Polo, Luciano 2003. World Wide Web Technology Architecture A Conceptual Analysis . New Devices . Skau, H.O. March 1990. The World Wide Web and Health Information. New Devices . Missing or empty url  help  External links  edit  Wikimedia Commons has media related to World Wide Web . Wikibooks has a book on the topic of Nets, Webs and the Information Infrastructure The first website Early archive of the first Web site Internet Statistics Growth and Usage of the Web and the Internet Living Internet A comprehensive history of the Internet, including the World Wide Web Web Design and Development at Curlie World Wide Web Consortium W3C W3C Recommendations Reduce World Wide Wait World Wide Web Size Daily estimated size of the World Wide Web Antonio A. Casilli, Some Elements for a Sociology of Online Interactions The Erds Webgraph Server offers weekly updated graph representation of a constantly increasing fraction of the WWW The 25th Anniversary of the World Wide Web is an animated video produced by USAID and TechChange which explores the role of the WWW in addressing extreme poverty v t e Telecommunications History Beacon Broadcasting Cable protection system Cable TV Communications satellite Computer network Drums Electrical telegraph Fax Heliographs Hydraulic telegraph Internet Mass media Mobile phone Optical telecommunication Optical telegraphy Pager Photophone Prepaid mobile phone Radio Radiotelephone Satellite communications Semaphore Smartphone Smoke signals Telecommunications history Telautograph Telegraphy Teleprinter teletype Telephone The Telephone Cases Television Undersea telegraph line Videoconferencing Videophone Videotelephony Whistled language Pioneers Edwin Howard Armstrong John Logie Baird Paul Baran Alexander Graham Bell Tim Berners-Lee Jagadish Chandra Bose Vint Cerf Claude Chappe Donald Davies Lee de Forest Philo Farnsworth Reginald Fessenden Elisha Gray Erna Schneider Hoover Charles K. Kao Hedy Lamarr Innocenzo Manzetti Guglielmo Marconi Antonio Meucci Radia Perlman Alexander Stepanovich Popov Johann Philipp Reis Henry Sutton Nikola Tesla Camille Tissot Alfred Vail Charles Wheatstone Vladimir K. Zworykin Transmission media Coaxial cable Fiber-optic communication Optical fiber Free-space optical communication Molecular communication Radio waves Transmission line Network topology and switching Links Nodes Terminal node Network switching   circuit packet  Telephone exchange Multiplexing Space-division Frequency-division Time-division Polarization-division Orbital angular-momentum Code-division Networks ARPANET BITNET Cellular network Computer CYCLADES Ethernet FidoNet Internet ISDN LAN Mobile NGN NPL network Public Switched Telephone Radio Telecommunications equipment Television Telex WAN Wireless network World Wide Web Category Outline Portal Commons v t e Web syndication History Blogging Podcasting VlogVideo blogging Web syndication technology Types Art Bloggernacle Classical music Corporate Dream diary Edublog Electronic journal Fake Family Fashion Food Health Law Lifelog Litblog MP3 News Photoblog Police Political Prayer Project Reverse Travel Warblog Technology General BitTorrent Feed URI scheme Features Linkback Permalink Ping Pingback Reblogging Refback Rollback Trackback Mechanism Conversation threading Geotagging RSS enclosure Synchronization Memetics Atom feed Data feed Photofeed Product feed RDF feed Web feed RSS GeoRSS MRSS RSS TV Social Inter-process communication Livemark Mashup Referencing RSS editor RSS tracking Streaming media Standard OML OPML RSS Advisory Board Usenet World Wide Web XBEL XOXO Form Audio podcast Enhanced podcast Mobilecast Narrowcasting Peercasting Screencast Slidecasting Videocast Webcomic Webtoon Web series Anonymous blogging Collaborative blog Columnist Instant messaging Liveblogging Microblog Mobile blogging Roblog Spam blog Video blogging Motovlogging Media Alternative media Carnivals Fiction Journalism Citizen Database Online diary Search engines Sideblog Software Web directory Micromedia Aggregation News Poll Review Search Video Atom AtomPub Broadcatching Hashtag NewsML 1 G2 Social communication Social software Web Slice Related Blogosphere Escribitionist Glossary of blogging Pay per click Posting style Slashdot effect Spam in blogs Uses of podcasting v t e Semantic Web Background Databases Hypertext Internet Ontologies Semantics Semantic networks World Wide Web Sub-topics Dataspaces Hyperdata Linked data Rule-based systems Applications Semantic analytics Semantic broker Semantic computing Semantic mapper Semantic matching Semantic publishing Semantic reasoner Semantic search Semantic service-oriented architecture Semantic wiki Related topics Collective intelligence Description logic Folksonomy Geotagging Information architecture Knowledge extraction Knowledge management Knowledge representation and reasoning Library 2.0 Digital library Digital humanities Metadata References Topic map Web 2.0 Web engineering Web Science Trust Standards Syntax and supporting technologies HTTP IRI URI RDF triples RDFXML JSON-LD Turtle TriG Notation3 N-Triples TriX no W3C standard RRID SPARQL XML Semantic HTML Schemas, ontologies and rules Common Logic OWL RDFS Rule Interchange Format Semantic Web Rule Language ALPS SHACL Semantic annotation eRDF GRDDL Microdata Microformats RDFa SAWSDL Facebook Platform Common vocabularies DOAP Dublin Core FOAF Schema.org SIOC SKOS Microformat vocabularies hAtom hCalendar hCard hProduct hRecipe hResume hReview Authority control BNE  XX4576804 BNF  cb13319953j data GND  4363898-3 LCCN  sh95000541 NARA  10644635 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleWorld_Wide_Web oldid914137151  Categories  World Wide Web Computer-related introductions in 1989 English inventions British inventions Humancomputer interaction Information Age CERN Tim Berners-Lee Web technology 20th-century inventions Hidden categories CS1 errors deprecated parameters Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2016 CS1 maint archived copy as title Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors markup CS1 errors missing periodical CS1 maint multiple names authors list Articles with short description EngvarB from August 2018 Use dmy dates from October 2012 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2019 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 1997 All articles containing potentially dated statements All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from July 2019 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from November 2016 Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles lacking reliable references from April 2018 Pages using web citations with no URL Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Curlie links Wikipedia articles with BNE identifiers Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers Wikipedia articles with NARA identifiers