Artificial intelligence From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This is the latest accepted revision , reviewed on 8 September 2019 . Jump to navigation Jump to search AI redirects here. For other uses, see AI disambiguation and Artificial intelligence disambiguation . Intelligence demonstrated by machines Artificial intelligence Major goals Knowledge reasoning Planning Machine learning Natural language processing Computer vision Robotics Artificial general intelligence Approaches Symbolic Deep learning Bayesian networks Evolutionary algorithms Philosophy Ethics Existential risk Turing test Chinese room Control problem Friendly AI History Timeline Progress AI winter Technology Applications Projects Programming languages Glossary Glossary v t e In computer science , artificial intelligence  AI , sometimes called machine intelligence , is intelligence demonstrated by machines , in contrast to the natural intelligence displayed by humans. Colloquially, the term artificial intelligence is often used to describe machines or computers that mimic cognitive functions that humans associate with the human mind , such as learning and problem solving. 1  As machines become increasingly capable, tasks considered to require intelligence are often removed from the definition of AI, a phenomenon known as the AI effect . 2  A quip in Teslers Theorem says AI is whatever hasnt been done yet. 3  For instance, optical character recognition is frequently excluded from things considered to be AI, having become a routine technology. 4  Modern machine capabilities generally classified as AI include successfully understanding human speech , 5  competing at the highest level in strategic game systems such as chess and Go , 6  autonomously operating cars , intelligent routing in content delivery networks , and military simulations . Artificial intelligence can be classified into three different types of systems analytical, human-inspired, and humanized artificial intelligence. 7  Analytical AI has only characteristics consistent with cognitive intelligence  generating a cognitive representation of the world and using learning based on past experience to inform future decisions. Human-inspired AI has elements from cognitive and emotional intelligence  understanding human emotions, in addition to cognitive elements, and considering them in their decision making . Humanized AI shows characteristics of all types of competencies i.e., cognitive, emotional, and social intelligence , is able to be self-conscious and is self-aware in interactions. Artificial intelligence was founded as an academic discipline in 1956, and in the years since has experienced several waves of optimism, 8  9  followed by disappointment and the loss of funding known as an  AI winter , 10  11  followed by new approaches, success and renewed funding. 9  12  For most of its history, AI research has been divided into subfields that often fail to communicate with each other. 13  These sub-fields are based on technical considerations, such as particular goals e.g.  robotics  or machine learning, 14  the use of particular tools logic or artificial neural networks , or deep philosophical differences. 15  16  17  Subfields have also been based on social factors particular institutions or the work of particular researchers. 13  The traditional problems or goals of AI research include reasoning , knowledge representation , planning , learning , natural language processing , perception and the ability to move and manipulate objects. 14  General intelligence is among the fields long-term goals. 18  Approaches include statistical methods , computational intelligence , and traditional symbolic AI . Many tools are used in AI, including versions of search and mathematical optimization , artificial neural networks , and methods based on statistics, probability and economics . The AI field draws upon computer science , information engineering , mathematics , psychology , linguistics , philosophy , and many other fields. The field was founded on the claim that human intelligence can be so precisely described that a machine can be made to simulate it. 19  This raises philosophical arguments about the nature of the mind and the ethics of creating artificial beings endowed with human-like intelligence which are issues that have been explored by myth , fiction and philosophy since antiquity . 20  Some people also consider AI to be a danger to humanity if it progresses unabated. 21  Others believe that AI, unlike previous technological revolutions, will create a risk of mass unemployment . 22  In the twenty-first century, AI techniques have experienced a resurgence following concurrent advances in computer power , large amounts of data , and theoretical understanding and AI techniques have become an essential part of the technology industry , helping to solve many challenging problems in computer science, software engineering and operations research . 23  12  .mw-parser-output .toclimit-2 .toclevel-1 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-3 .toclevel-2 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-4 .toclevel-3 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-5 .toclevel-4 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-6 .toclevel-5 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-7 .toclevel-6 uldisplaynone Contents 1 History 2 Definitions 3 Basics 4 Problems 4.1 Reasoning, problem solving 4.2 Knowledge representation 4.3 Planning 4.4 Learning 4.5 Natural language processing 4.6 Perception 4.7 Motion and manipulation 4.8 Social intelligence 4.9 General intelligence 5 Approaches 5.1 Cybernetics and brain simulation 5.2 Symbolic 5.2.1 Cognitive simulation 5.2.2 Logic-based 5.2.3 Anti-logic or scruffy 5.2.4 Knowledge-based 5.3 Sub-symbolic 5.3.1 Embodied intelligence 5.3.2 Computational intelligence and soft computing 5.4 Statistical learning 5.5 Integrating the approaches 6 Tools 6.1 Search and optimization 6.2 Logic 6.3 Probabilistic methods for uncertain reasoning 6.4 Classifiers and statistical learning methods 6.5 Artificial neural networks 6.5.1 Deep feedforward neural networks 6.5.2 Deep recurrent neural networks 6.6 Evaluating progress 7 Applications 7.1 Healthcare 7.2 Automotive 7.3 Finance and economics 7.4 Government 7.5 Video games 7.6 Military 7.7 Audit 7.8 Advertising 7.9 Art 8 Philosophy and ethics 8.1 The limits of artificial general intelligence 8.2 Potential harm 8.2.1 Existential risk 8.2.2 Devaluation of humanity 8.2.3 Social justice 8.2.4 Decrease in demand for human labor 8.2.5 Autonomous weapons 8.3 Ethical machines 8.3.1 Artificial moral agents 8.3.2 Machine ethics 8.3.3 Malevolent and friendly AI 8.4 Machine consciousness, sentience and mind 8.4.1 Consciousness 8.4.2 Computationalism and functionalism 8.4.3 Strong AI hypothesis 8.4.4 Robot rights 8.5 Superintelligence 8.5.1 Technological singularity 8.5.2 Transhumanism 9 Economics 10 In fiction 11 See also 12 Explanatory notes 13 References 13.1 AI textbooks 13.2 History of AI 13.3 Other sources 14 Further reading 15 External links History  edit  Main articles History of artificial intelligence and Timeline of artificial intelligence Silver didrachma from Crete depicting Talos , an ancient mythical automaton with artificial intelligence Thought-capable artificial beings appeared as storytelling devices in antiquity, 24  and have been common in fiction, as in Mary Shelley s Frankenstein or Karel apek s R.U.R. Rossums Universal Robots . 25  These characters and their fates raised many of the same issues now discussed in the ethics of artificial intelligence . 20  The study of mechanical or formal reasoning began with philosophers and mathematicians in antiquity. The study of mathematical logic led directly to Alan Turing s theory of computation , which suggested that a machine, by shuffling symbols as simple as 0 and 1, could simulate any conceivable act of mathematical deduction. This insight, that digital computers can simulate any process of formal reasoning, is known as the ChurchTuring thesis . 26  Along with concurrent discoveries in neurobiology , information theory and cybernetics , this led researchers to consider the possibility of building an electronic brain. Turing proposed that if a human could not distinguish between responses from a machine and a human, the machine could be considered intelligent. 27  The first work that is now generally recognized as AI was McCullouch and Pitts  1943 formal design for Turing-complete artificial neurons. 28  The field of AI research was born at a workshop at Dartmouth College in 1956. 29  Attendees Allen Newell  CMU , Herbert Simon  CMU , John McCarthy  MIT , Marvin Minsky  MIT  and Arthur Samuel  IBM  became the founders and leaders of AI research. 30  They and their students produced programs that the press described as astonishing 31  computers were learning checkers strategies c. 1954 32  and by 1959 were reportedly playing better than the average human, 33  solving word problems in algebra, proving logical theorems  Logic Theorist , first run c. 1956 and speaking English. 34  By the middle of the 1960s, research in the U.S. was heavily funded by the Department of Defense 35  and laboratories had been established around the world. 36  AIs founders were optimistic about the future Herbert Simon predicted, machines will be capable, within twenty years, of doing any work a man can do. Marvin Minsky agreed, writing, within a generation  ... the problem of creating artificial intelligence will substantially be solved. 8  They failed to recognize the difficulty of some of the remaining tasks. Progress slowed and in 1974, in response to the criticism of Sir James Lighthill 37  and ongoing pressure from the US Congress to fund more productive projects, both the U.S. and British governments cut off exploratory research in AI. The next few years would later be called an  AI winter , 10  a period when obtaining funding for AI projects was difficult. In the early 1980s, AI research was revived by the commercial success of expert systems , 38  a form of AI program that simulated the knowledge and analytical skills of human experts. By 1985, the market for AI had reached over a billion dollars. At the same time, Japans fifth generation computer project inspired the U.S and British governments to restore funding for academic research . 9  However, beginning with the collapse of the Lisp Machine market in 1987, AI once again fell into disrepute, and a second, longer-lasting hiatus began. 11  In the late 1990s and early 21st century, AI began to be used for logistics, data mining , medical diagnosis and other areas. 23  The success was due to increasing computational power see Moores law , greater emphasis on solving specific problems, new ties between AI and other fields such as statistics , economics and mathematics , and a commitment by researchers to mathematical methods and scientific standards. 39  Deep Blue became the first computer chess-playing system to beat a reigning world chess champion, Garry Kasparov , on 11 May 1997. 40  In 2011, a Jeopardy quiz show exhibition match, IBM s question answering system , Watson , defeated the two greatest Jeopardy champions, Brad Rutter and Ken Jennings , by a significant margin. 41  Faster computers , algorithmic improvements, and access to large amounts of data enabled advances in machine learning and perception data-hungry deep learning methods started to dominate accuracy benchmarks around 2012 . 42  The Kinect , which provides a 3D bodymotion interface for the Xbox 360 and the Xbox One , uses algorithms that emerged from lengthy AI research 43  as do intelligent personal assistants in smartphones . 44  In March 2016, AlphaGo won 4 out of 5 games of Go in a match with Go champion Lee Sedol , becoming the first computer Go-playing system to beat a professional Go player without handicaps . 6  45  In the 2017 Future of Go Summit , AlphaGo won a three-game match with Ke Jie , 46  who at the time continuously held the world No. 1 ranking for two years. 47  48  This marked the completion of a significant milestone in the development of Artificial Intelligence as Go is a relatively complex game, more so than Chess. According to Bloombergs Jack Clark, 2015 was a landmark year for artificial intelligence, with the number of software projects that use AI Google increased from a sporadic usage in 2012 to more than 2,700 projects. Clark also presents factual data indicating the improvements of AI since 2012 supported by lower error rates in image processing tasks. 49  He attributes this to an increase in affordable neural networks , due to a rise in cloud computing infrastructure and to an increase in research tools and datasets. 12  Other cited examples include Microsofts development of a Skype system that can automatically translate from one language to another and Facebooks system that can describe images to blind people. 49  In a 2017 survey, one in five companies reported they had incorporated AI in some offerings or processes. 50  51  Around 2016, China greatly accelerated its government funding given its large supply of data and its rapidly increasing research output, some observers believe it may be on track to becoming an AI superpower. 52  53  However, it has been acknowledged that reports regarding artificial intelligence have tended to be exaggerated. 54  55  56  Definitions  edit  Computer science defines AI research as the study of  intelligent agents  any device that perceives its environment and takes actions that maximize its chance of successfully achieving its goals. 57  A more elaborate definition characterizes AI as a systems ability to correctly interpret external data, to learn from such data, and to use those learnings to achieve specific goals and tasks through flexible adaptation. 58  Basics  edit  A typical AI analyzes its environment and takes actions that maximize its chance of success. 57  An AIs intended utility function or goal can be simple 1 if the AI wins a game of Go , 0 otherwise or complex Do mathematically similar actions to the ones succeeded in the past. Goals can be explicitly defined, or induced. If the AI is programmed for  reinforcement learning , goals can be implicitly induced by rewarding some types of behavior or punishing others. a  Alternatively, an evolutionary system can induce goals by using a  fitness function  to mutate and preferentially replicate high-scoring AI systems, similarly to how animals evolved to innately desire certain goals such as finding food. 59  Some AI systems, such as nearest-neighbor, instead of reason by analogy, these systems are not generally given goals, except to the degree that goals are implicit in their training data. 60  Such systems can still be benchmarked if the non-goal system is framed as a system whose goal is to successfully accomplish its narrow classification task. 61  AI often revolves around the use of algorithms . An algorithm is a set of unambiguous instructions that a mechanical computer can execute. b  A complex algorithm is often built on top of other, simpler, algorithms. A simple example of an algorithm is the following optimal for first player recipe for play at tic-tac-toe  62  If someone has a threat that is, two in a row, take the remaining square. Otherwise, if a move forks to create two threats at once, play that move. Otherwise, take the center square if it is free. Otherwise, if your opponent has played in a corner, take the opposite corner. Otherwise, take an empty corner if one exists. Otherwise, take any empty square. Many AI algorithms are capable of learning from data they can enhance themselves by learning new heuristics strategies, or rules of thumb, that have worked well in the past, or can themselves write other algorithms. Some of the learners described below, including Bayesian networks, decision trees, and nearest-neighbor, could theoretically, given infinite data, time, and memory learn to approximate any function , including which combination of mathematical functions would best describe the world  citation needed  . These learners could therefore, derive all possible knowledge, by considering every possible hypothesis and matching them against the data. In practice, it is almost never possible to consider every possibility, because of the phenomenon of  combinatorial explosion , where the amount of time needed to solve a problem grows exponentially. Much of AI research involves figuring out how to identify and avoid considering broad range of possibilities that are unlikely to be beneficial. 63  64  For example, when viewing a map and looking for the shortest driving route from Denver to New York in the East, one can in most cases skip looking at any path through San Francisco or other areas far to the West thus, an AI wielding a pathfinding algorithm like A can avoid the combinatorial explosion that would ensue if every possible route had to be ponderously considered in turn. 65  The earliest and easiest to understand approach to AI was symbolism such as formal logic If an otherwise healthy adult has a fever, then they may have influenza . A second, more general, approach is Bayesian inference  If the current patient has a fever, adjust the probability they have influenza in such-and-such way. The third major approach, extremely popular in routine business AI applications, are analogizers such as SVM and nearest-neighbor  After examining the records of known past patients whose temperature, symptoms, age, and other factors mostly match the current patient, X of those patients turned out to have influenza. A fourth approach is harder to intuitively understand, but is inspired by how the brains machinery works the artificial neural network approach uses artificial  neurons  that can learn by comparing itself to the desired output and altering the strengths of the connections between its internal neurons to reinforce connections that seemed to be useful. These four main approaches can overlap with each other and with evolutionary systems for example, neural nets can learn to make inferences, to generalize, and to make analogies. Some systems implicitly or explicitly use multiple of these approaches, alongside many other AI and non-AI algorithms 66  the best approach is often different depending on the problem. 67  68  Learning algorithms work on the basis that strategies, algorithms, and inferences that worked well in the past are likely to continue working well in the future. These inferences can be obvious, such as since the sun rose every morning for the last 10,000 days, it will probably rise tomorrow morning as well. They can be nuanced, such as X of families have geographically separate species with color variants, so there is an Y chance that undiscovered black swans exist. Learners also work on the basis of  Occams razor  The simplest theory that explains the data is the likeliest. Therefore, according to Occams razor principle, a learner must be designed such that it prefers simpler theories to complex theories, except in cases where the complex theory is proven substantially better. The blue line could be an example of overfitting a linear function due to random noise. Settling on a bad, overly complex theory gerrymandered to fit all the past training data is known as overfitting . Many systems attempt to reduce overfitting by rewarding a theory in accordance with how well it fits the data, but penalizing the theory in accordance with how complex the theory is. 69  Besides classic overfitting, learners can also disappoint by learning the wrong lesson. A toy example is that an image classifier trained only on pictures of brown horses and black cats might conclude that all brown patches are likely to be horses. 70  A real-world example is that, unlike humans, current image classifiers dont determine the spatial relationship between components of the picture instead, they learn abstract patterns of pixels that humans are oblivious to, but that linearly correlate with images of certain types of real objects. Faintly superimposing such a pattern on a legitimate image results in an adversarial image that the system misclassifies. c  71  72  73  A self-driving car system may use a neural network to determine which parts of the picture seem to match previous training images of pedestrians, and then model those areas as slow-moving but somewhat unpredictable rectangular prisms that must be avoided. 74  75  Compared with humans, existing AI lacks several features of human  commonsense reasoning  most notably, humans have powerful mechanisms for reasoning about  nave physics  such as space, time, and physical interactions. This enables even young children to easily make inferences like If I roll this pen off a table, it will fall on the floor. Humans also have a powerful mechanism of  folk psychology  that helps them to interpret natural-language sentences such as The city councilmen refused the demonstrators a permit because they advocated violence. A generic AI has difficulty discerning whether the ones alleged to be advocating violence are the councilmen or the demonstrators. 76  77  78  This lack of common knowledge means that AI often makes different mistakes than humans make, in ways that can seem incomprehensible. For example, existing self-driving cars cannot reason about the location nor the intentions of pedestrians in the exact way that humans do, and instead must use non-human modes of reasoning to avoid accidents. 79  80  81  Problems  edit  The overall research goal of artificial intelligence is to create technology that allows computers and machines to function in an intelligent manner. The general problem of simulating or creating intelligence has been broken down into sub-problems. These consist of particular traits or capabilities that researchers expect an intelligent system to display. The traits described below have received the most attention. 14  Reasoning, problem solving  edit  Early researchers developed algorithms that imitated step-by-step reasoning that humans use when they solve puzzles or make logical deductions. 82  By the late 1980s and 1990s, AI research had developed methods for dealing with uncertain or incomplete information, employing concepts from probability and economics . 83  These algorithms proved to be insufficient for solving large reasoning problems, because they experienced a combinatorial explosion they became exponentially slower as the problems grew larger. 63  In fact, even humans rarely use the step-by-step deduction that early AI research was able to model. They solve most of their problems using fast, intuitive judgements. 84  Knowledge representation  edit  An ontology represents knowledge as a set of concepts within a domain and the relationships between those concepts. Main articles Knowledge representation and Commonsense knowledge Knowledge representation 85  and knowledge engineering 86  are central to classical AI research. Some expert systems attempt to gather together explicit knowledge possessed by experts in some narrow domain. In addition, some projects attempt to gather the commonsense knowledge known to the average person into a database containing extensive knowledge about the world. Among the things a comprehensive commonsense knowledge base would contain are objects, properties, categories and relations between objects 87  situations, events, states and time 88  causes and effects 89  knowledge about knowledge what we know about what other people know 90  and many other, less well researched domains. A representation of what exists is an ontology  the set of objects, relations, concepts, and properties formally described so that software agents can interpret them. The semantics of these are captured as description logic concepts, roles, and individuals, and typically implemented as classes, properties, and individuals in the Web Ontology Language . 91  The most general ontologies are called upper ontologies , which attempt to provide a foundation for all other knowledge 92  by acting as mediators between domain ontologies that cover specific knowledge about a particular knowledge domain field of interest or area of concern. Such formal knowledge representations can be used in content-based indexing and retrieval, 93  scene interpretation, 94  clinical decision support, 95  knowledge discovery mining interesting and actionable inferences from large databases, 96  and other areas. 97  Among the most difficult problems in knowledge representation are Default reasoning and the qualification problem Many of the things people know take the form of working assumptions. For example, if a bird comes up in conversation, people typically picture an animal that is fist-sized, sings, and flies. None of these things are true about all birds. John McCarthy identified this problem in 1969 98  as the qualification problem for any commonsense rule that AI researchers care to represent, there tend to be a huge number of exceptions. Almost nothing is simply true or false in the way that abstract logic requires. AI research has explored a number of solutions to this problem. 99  The breadth of commonsense knowledge The number of atomic facts that the average person knows is very large. Research projects that attempt to build a complete knowledge base of commonsense knowledge e.g., Cyc  require enormous amounts of laborious ontological engineering they must be built, by hand, one complicated concept at a time. 100  The subsymbolic form of some commonsense knowledge Much of what people know is not represented as facts or statements that they could express verbally. For example, a chess master will avoid a particular chess position because it feels too exposed 101  or an art critic can take one look at a statue and realize that it is a fake. 102  These are non-conscious and sub-symbolic intuitions or tendencies in the human brain. 103  Knowledge like this informs, supports and provides a context for symbolic, conscious knowledge. As with the related problem of sub-symbolic reasoning, it is hoped that situated AI , computational intelligence , or statistical AI will provide ways to represent this kind of knowledge. 103  Planning  edit  A hierarchical control system is a form of control system in which a set of devices and governing software is arranged in a hierarchy. Main article Automated planning and scheduling Intelligent agents must be able to set goals and achieve them. 104  They need a way to visualize the futurea representation of the state of the world and be able to make predictions about how their actions will change itand be able to make choices that maximize the utility or value of available choices. 105  In classical planning problems, the agent can assume that it is the only system acting in the world, allowing the agent to be certain of the consequences of its actions. 106  However, if the agent is not the only actor, then it requires that the agent can reason under uncertainty. This calls for an agent that can not only assess its environment and make predictions, but also evaluate its predictions and adapt based on its assessment. 107  Multi-agent planning uses the cooperation and competition of many agents to achieve a given goal. Emergent behavior such as this is used by evolutionary algorithms and swarm intelligence . 108  Learning  edit  Main article Machine learning Machine learning ML, a fundamental concept of AI research since the fields inception, 109  is the study of computer algorithms that improve automatically through experience. 110  111  Unsupervised learning is the ability to find patterns in a stream of input, without requiring a human to label the inputs first. Supervised learning includes both classification and numerical regression , which requires a human to label the input data first. Classification is used to determine what category something belongs in, and occurs after a program sees a number of examples of things from several categories. Regression is the attempt to produce a function that describes the relationship between inputs and outputs and predicts how the outputs should change as the inputs change. 111  Both classifiers and regression learners can be viewed as function approximators trying to learn an unknown possibly implicit function for example, a spam classifier can be viewed as learning a function that maps from the text of an email to one of two categories, spam or not spam. Computational learning theory can assess learners by computational complexity , by sample complexity how much data is required, or by other notions of optimization . 112  In reinforcement learning 113  the agent is rewarded for good responses and punished for bad ones. The agent uses this sequence of rewards and punishments to form a strategy for operating in its problem space. Natural language processing  edit  A parse tree represents the syntactic structure of a sentence according to some formal grammar . Main article Natural language processing Natural language processing 114  NLP gives machines the ability to read and understand human language. A sufficiently powerful natural language processing system would enable natural-language user interfaces and the acquisition of knowledge directly from human-written sources, such as newswire texts. Some straightforward applications of natural language processing include information retrieval , text mining , question answering 115  and machine translation . 116  Many current approaches use word co-occurrence frequencies to construct syntactic representations of text. Keyword spotting strategies for search are popular and scalable but dumb a search query for dog might only match documents with the literal word dog and miss a document with the word poodle. Lexical affinity strategies use the occurrence of words such as accident to assess the sentiment of a document. Modern statistical NLP approaches can combine all these strategies as well as others, and often achieve acceptable accuracy at the page or paragraph level, but continue to lack the semantic understanding required to classify isolated sentences well. Besides the usual difficulties with encoding semantic commonsense knowledge, existing semantic NLP sometimes scales too poorly to be viable in business applications. Beyond semantic NLP, the ultimate goal of narrative NLP is to embody a full understanding of commonsense reasoning. 117  Perception  edit  Main articles Machine perception , Computer vision , and Speech recognition Feature detection pictured edge detection  helps AI compose informative abstract structures out of raw data. Machine perception 118  is the ability to use input from sensors such as cameras visible spectrum or infrared, microphones, wireless signals, and active lidar , sonar, radar, and tactile sensors  to deduce aspects of the world. Applications include speech recognition , 119  facial recognition , and object recognition . 120  Computer vision is the ability to analyze visual input. Such input is usually ambiguous a giant, fifty-meter-tall pedestrian far away may produce exactly the same pixels as a nearby normal-sized pedestrian, requiring the AI to judge the relative likelihood and reasonableness of different interpretations, for example by using its object model to assess that fifty-meter pedestrians do not exist. 121  Motion and manipulation  edit  Main article Robotics AI is heavily used in robotics . 122  Advanced robotic arms and other industrial robots , widely used in modern factories, can learn from experience how to move efficiently despite the presence of friction and gear slippage. 123  A modern mobile robot, when given a small, static, and visible environment, can easily determine its location and map its environment however, dynamic environments, such as in endoscopy  the interior of a patients breathing body, pose a greater challenge. Motion planning is the process of breaking down a movement task into primitives such as individual joint movements. Such movement often involves compliant motion, a process where movement requires maintaining physical contact with an object. 124  125  126  Moravecs paradox generalizes that low-level sensorimotor skills that humans take for granted are, counterintuitively, difficult to program into a robot the paradox is named after Hans Moravec , who stated in 1988 that it is comparatively easy to make computers exhibit adult level performance on intelligence tests or playing checkers, and difficult or impossible to give them the skills of a one-year-old when it comes to perception and mobility. 127  128  This is attributed to the fact that, unlike checkers, physical dexterity has been a direct target of natural selection for millions of years. 129  Social intelligence  edit  Main article Affective computing Kismet , a robot with rudimentary social skills 130  Moravecs paradox can be extended to many forms of social intelligence. 131  132  Distributed multi-agent coordination of autonomous vehicles remains a difficult problem. 133  Affective computing is an interdisciplinary umbrella that comprises systems which recognize, interpret, process, or simulate human affects . 134  135  136  Moderate successes related to affective computing include textual sentiment analysis and, more recently, multimodal affect analysis see multimodal sentiment analysis , wherein AI classifies the affects displayed by a videotaped subject. 137  In the long run, social skills and an understanding of human emotion and game theory would be valuable to a social agent. Being able to predict the actions of others by understanding their motives and emotional states would allow an agent to make better decisions. Some computer systems mimic human emotion and expressions to appear more sensitive to the emotional dynamics of human interaction, or to otherwise facilitate humancomputer interaction . 138  Similarly, some virtual assistants are programmed to speak conversationally or even to banter humorously this tends to give nave users an unrealistic conception of how intelligent existing computer agents actually are. 139  General intelligence  edit  Main articles Artificial general intelligence and AI-complete Historically, projects such as the Cyc knowledge base 1984 and the massive Japanese Fifth Generation Computer Systems initiative 19821992 attempted to cover the breadth of human cognition. These early projects failed to escape the limitations of non-quantitative symbolic logic models and, in retrospect, greatly underestimated the difficulty of cross-domain AI. Nowadays, the vast majority of current AI researchers work instead on tractable narrow AI applications such as medical diagnosis or automobile navigation. 140  Many researchers predict that such narrow AI work in different individual domains will eventually be incorporated into a machine with artificial general intelligence AGI, combining most of the narrow skills mentioned in this article and at some point even exceeding human ability in most or all these areas. 18  141  Many advances have general, cross-domain significance. One high-profile example is that DeepMind in the 2010s developed a generalized artificial intelligence that could learn many diverse Atari games on its own, and later developed a variant of the system which succeeds at sequential learning . 142  143  144  Besides transfer learning , 145  hypothetical AGI breakthroughs could include the development of reflective architectures that can engage in decision-theoretic metareasoning, and figuring out how to slurp up a comprehensive knowledge base from the entire unstructured Web . 5  Some argue that some kind of currently-undiscovered conceptually straightforward, but mathematically difficult, Master Algorithm could lead to AGI. 146  Finally, a few emergent approaches look to simulating human intelligence extremely closely, and believe that anthropomorphic features like an artificial brain or simulated child development may someday reach a critical point where general intelligence emerges. 147  148  Many of the problems in this article may also require general intelligence, if machines are to solve the problems as well as people do. For example, even specific straightforward tasks, like machine translation , require that a machine read and write in both languages  NLP , follow the authors argument  reason , know what is being talked about  knowledge , and faithfully reproduce the authors original intent  social intelligence . A problem like machine translation is considered  AI-complete , because all of these problems need to be solved simultaneously in order to reach human-level machine performance. Approaches  edit  There is no established unifying theory or paradigm that guides AI research. Researchers disagree about many issues. 149  A few of the most long standing questions that have remained unanswered are these should artificial intelligence simulate natural intelligence by studying psychology or neurobiology  Or is human biology as irrelevant to AI research as bird biology is to aeronautical engineering  15  Can intelligent behavior be described using simple, elegant principles such as logic or optimization  Or does it necessarily require solving a large number of completely unrelated problems 16  Cybernetics and brain simulation  edit  Main articles Cybernetics and Computational neuroscience In the 1940s and 1950s, a number of researchers explored the connection between neurobiology , information theory , and cybernetics . Some of them built machines that used electronic networks to exhibit rudimentary intelligence, such as W. Grey Walter s turtles and the Johns Hopkins Beast . Many of these researchers gathered for meetings of the Teleological Society at Princeton University and the Ratio Club in England. 150  By 1960, this approach was largely abandoned, although elements of it would be revived in the 1980s. Symbolic  edit  Main article Symbolic AI When access to digital computers became possible in the mid 1950s, AI research began to explore the possibility that human intelligence could be reduced to symbol manipulation. The research was centered in three institutions Carnegie Mellon University , Stanford and MIT , and as described below, each one developed its own style of research. John Haugeland named these symbolic approaches to AI good old fashioned AI or  GOFAI . 151  During the 1960s, symbolic approaches had achieved great success at simulating high-level thinking in small demonstration programs. Approaches based on cybernetics or artificial neural networks were abandoned or pushed into the background. 152  Researchers in the 1960s and the 1970s were convinced that symbolic approaches would eventually succeed in creating a machine with artificial general intelligence and considered this the goal of their field. Cognitive simulation  edit  Economist Herbert Simon and Allen Newell studied human problem-solving skills and attempted to formalize them, and their work laid the foundations of the field of artificial intelligence, as well as cognitive science , operations research and management science . Their research team used the results of psychological experiments to develop programs that simulated the techniques that people used to solve problems. This tradition, centered at Carnegie Mellon University would eventually culminate in the development of the Soar architecture in the middle 1980s. 153  154  Logic-based  edit  Unlike Simon and Newell, John McCarthy felt that machines did not need to simulate human thought, but should instead try to find the essence of abstract reasoning and problem-solving, regardless whether people used the same algorithms. 15  His laboratory at Stanford  SAIL  focused on using formal logic to solve a wide variety of problems, including knowledge representation , planning and learning . 155  Logic was also the focus of the work at the University of Edinburgh and elsewhere in Europe which led to the development of the programming language Prolog and the science of logic programming . 156  Anti-logic or scruffy  edit  Researchers at MIT such as Marvin Minsky and Seymour Papert  157  found that solving difficult problems in vision and natural language processing required ad-hoc solutionsthey argued that there was no simple and general principle like logic  that would capture all the aspects of intelligent behavior. Roger Schank described their anti-logic approaches as  scruffy  as opposed to the  neat  paradigms at CMU and Stanford. 16  Commonsense knowledge bases such as Doug Lenat s Cyc  are an example of scruffy AI, since they must be built by hand, one complicated concept at a time. 158  Knowledge-based  edit  When computers with large memories became available around 1970, researchers from all three traditions began to build knowledge into AI applications. 159  This knowledge revolution led to the development and deployment of expert systems introduced by Edward Feigenbaum , the first truly successful form of AI software. 38  A key component of the system architecture for all expert systems is the knowledge base, which stores facts and rules that illustrate AI. 160  The knowledge revolution was also driven by the realization that enormous amounts of knowledge would be required by many simple AI applications. Sub-symbolic  edit  By the 1980s, progress in symbolic AI seemed to stall and many believed that symbolic systems would never be able to imitate all the processes of human cognition, especially perception , robotics , learning and pattern recognition . A number of researchers began to look into sub-symbolic approaches to specific AI problems. 17  Sub-symbolic methods manage to approach intelligence without specific representations of knowledge. Embodied intelligence  edit  This includes embodied , situated , behavior-based , and nouvelle AI . Researchers from the related field of robotics , such as Rodney Brooks , rejected symbolic AI and focused on the basic engineering problems that would allow robots to move and survive. 161  Their work revived the non-symbolic point of view of the early cybernetics researchers of the 1950s and reintroduced the use of control theory in AI. This coincided with the development of the embodied mind thesis in the related field of cognitive science  the idea that aspects of the body such as movement, perception and visualization are required for higher intelligence. Within developmental robotics , developmental learning approaches are elaborated upon to allow robots to accumulate repertoires of novel skills through autonomous self-exploration, social interaction with human teachers, and the use of guidance mechanisms active learning, maturation, motor synergies, etc.. 162  163  164  165  Computational intelligence and soft computing  edit  Interest in neural networks and  connectionism  was revived by David Rumelhart and others in the middle of the 1980s. 166  Artificial neural networks are an example of soft computing they are solutions to problems which cannot be solved with complete logical certainty, and where an approximate solution is often sufficient. Other soft computing approaches to AI include fuzzy systems , Grey system theory , evolutionary computation and many statistical tools. The application of soft computing to AI is studied collectively by the emerging discipline of computational intelligence . 167  Statistical learning  edit  Much of traditional GOFAI got bogged down on ad hoc patches to symbolic computation that worked on their own toy models but failed to generalize to real-world results. However, around the 1990s, AI researchers adopted sophisticated mathematical tools, such as hidden Markov models HMM, information theory , and normative Bayesian decision theory to compare or to unify competing architectures. The shared mathematical language permitted a high level of collaboration with more established fields like mathematics , economics or operations research . d  Compared with GOFAI, new statistical learning techniques such as HMM and neural networks were gaining higher levels of accuracy in many practical domains such as data mining , without necessarily acquiring a semantic understanding of the datasets. The increased successes with real-world data led to increasing emphasis on comparing different approaches against shared test data to see which approach performed best in a broader context than that provided by idiosyncratic toy models AI research was becoming more scientific . Nowadays results of experiments are often rigorously measurable, and are sometimes with difficulty reproducible. 39  168  Different statistical learning techniques have different limitations for example, basic HMM cannot model the infinite possible combinations of natural language. 169  Critics note that the shift from GOFAI to statistical learning is often also a shift away from explainable AI . In AGI research, some scholars caution against over-reliance on statistical learning, and argue that continuing research into GOFAI will still be necessary to attain general intelligence. 170  171  Integrating the approaches  edit  Intelligent agent paradigm An intelligent agent is a system that perceives its environment and takes actions which maximize its chances of success. The simplest intelligent agents are programs that solve specific problems. More complicated agents include human beings and organizations of human beings such as firms . The paradigm allows researchers to directly compare or even combine different approaches to isolated problems, by asking which agent is best at maximizing a given goal function. An agent that solves a specific problem can use any approach that workssome agents are symbolic and logical, some are sub-symbolic artificial neural networks and others may use new approaches. The paradigm also gives researchers a common language to communicate with other fieldssuch as decision theory and economicsthat also use concepts of abstract agents. Building a complete agent requires researchers to address realistic problems of integration for example, because sensory systems give uncertain information about the environment, planning systems must be able to function in the presence of uncertainty. The intelligent agent paradigm became widely accepted during the 1990s. 172  Agent architectures and cognitive architectures Researchers have designed systems to build intelligent systems out of interacting intelligent agents in a multi-agent system . 173  A hierarchical control system provides a bridge between sub-symbolic AI at its lowest, reactive levels and traditional symbolic AI at its highest levels, where relaxed time constraints permit planning and world modelling. 174  Some cognitive architectures are custom-built to solve a narrow problem others, such as Soar , are designed to mimic human cognition and to provide insight into general intelligence. Modern extensions of Soar are hybrid intelligent systems that include both symbolic and sub-symbolic components. 175  176  177  Tools  edit  AI has developed a large number of tools to solve the most difficult problems in computer science . A few of the most general of these methods are discussed below. Search and optimization  edit  Main articles Search algorithm , Mathematical optimization , and Evolutionary computation Many problems in AI can be solved in theory by intelligently searching through many possible solutions 178  Reasoning can be reduced to performing a search. For example, logical proof can be viewed as searching for a path that leads from premises to conclusions , where each step is the application of an inference rule . 179  Planning algorithms search through trees of goals and subgoals, attempting to find a path to a target goal, a process called means-ends analysis . 180  Robotics algorithms for moving limbs and grasping objects use local searches in configuration space . 123  Many learning algorithms use search algorithms based on optimization . Simple exhaustive searches 181  are rarely sufficient for most real-world problems the search space the number of places to search quickly grows to astronomical numbers . The result is a search that is too slow or never completes. The solution, for many problems, is to use  heuristics  or rules of thumb that prioritize choices in favor of those that are more likely to reach a goal and to do so in a shorter number of steps. In some search methodologies heuristics can also serve to entirely eliminate some choices that are unlikely to lead to a goal called  pruning the search tree . Heuristics supply the program with a best guess for the path on which the solution lies. 182  Heuristics limit the search for solutions into a smaller sample size. 124  A very different kind of search came to prominence in the 1990s, based on the mathematical theory of optimization . For many problems, it is possible to begin the search with some form of a guess and then refine the guess incrementally until no more refinements can be made. These algorithms can be visualized as blind hill climbing  we begin the search at a random point on the landscape, and then, by jumps or steps, we keep moving our guess uphill, until we reach the top. Other optimization algorithms are simulated annealing , beam search and random optimization . 183  A particle swarm seeking the global minimum Evolutionary computation uses a form of optimization search. For example, they may begin with a population of organisms the guesses and then allow them to mutate and recombine, selecting only the fittest to survive each generation refining the guesses. Classic evolutionary algorithms include genetic algorithms , gene expression programming , and genetic programming . 184  Alternatively, distributed search processes can coordinate via swarm intelligence algorithms. Two popular swarm algorithms used in search are particle swarm optimization inspired by bird flocking  and ant colony optimization inspired by ant trails . 185  186  Logic  edit  Main articles Logic programming and Automated reasoning Logic 187  is used for knowledge representation and problem solving, but it can be applied to other problems as well. For example, the satplan algorithm uses logic for planning 188  and inductive logic programming is a method for learning . 189  Several different forms of logic are used in AI research. Propositional logic 190  involves truth functions such as or and not. First-order logic 191  adds quantifiers and predicates , and can express facts about objects, their properties, and their relations with each other. Fuzzy set theory assigns a degree of truth between 0 and 1 to vague statements such as Alice is old or rich, or tall, or hungry that are too linguistically imprecise to be completely true or false. Fuzzy logic is successfully used in control systems to allow experts to contribute vague rules such as if you are close to the destination station and moving fast, increase the trains brake pressure these vague rules can then be numerically refined within the system. Fuzzy logic fails to scale well in knowledge bases many AI researchers question the validity of chaining fuzzy-logic inferences. e  193  194  Default logics , non-monotonic logics and circumscription 99  are forms of logic designed to help with default reasoning and the qualification problem . Several extensions of logic have been designed to handle specific domains of knowledge , such as description logics  87  situation calculus , event calculus and fluent calculus for representing events and time 88  causal calculus  89  belief calculus 195  and modal logics . 90  Overall, qualitative symbolic logic is brittle and scales poorly in the presence of noise or other uncertainty. Exceptions to rules are numerous, and it is difficult for logical systems to function in the presence of contradictory rules. 196  197  Probabilistic methods for uncertain reasoning  edit  Main articles Bayesian network , Hidden Markov model , Kalman filter , Particle filter , Decision theory , and Utility theory Expectation-maximization clustering of Old Faithful eruption data starts from a random guess but then successfully converges on an accurate clustering of the two physically distinct modes of eruption. Many problems in AI in reasoning, planning, learning, perception, and robotics require the agent to operate with incomplete or uncertain information. AI researchers have devised a number of powerful tools to solve these problems using methods from probability theory and economics. 198  Bayesian networks 199  are a very general tool that can be used for a large number of problems reasoning using the Bayesian inference algorithm, 200  learning using the expectation-maximization algorithm , f  202  planning using decision networks  203  and perception using dynamic Bayesian networks . 204  Probabilistic algorithms can also be used for filtering, prediction, smoothing and finding explanations for streams of data, helping perception systems to analyze processes that occur over time e.g., hidden Markov models or Kalman filters . 204  Compared with symbolic logic, formal Bayesian inference is computationally expensive. For inference to be tractable, most observations must be conditionally independent of one another. Complicated graphs with diamonds or other loops undirected cycles  can require a sophisticated method such as Markov chain Monte Carlo , which spreads an ensemble of random walkers throughout the Bayesian network and attempts to converge to an assessment of the conditional probabilities. Bayesian networks are used on Xbox Live to rate and match players wins and losses are evidence of how good a player is  citation needed  . AdSense uses a Bayesian network with over 300 million edges to learn which ads to serve. 196  A key concept from the science of economics is  utility  a measure of how valuable something is to an intelligent agent. Precise mathematical tools have been developed that analyze how an agent can make choices and plan, using decision theory , decision analysis , 205  and information value theory . 105  These tools include models such as Markov decision processes , 206  dynamic decision networks , 204  game theory and mechanism design . 207  Classifiers and statistical learning methods  edit  Main articles Classifier mathematics , Statistical classification , and Machine learning The simplest AI applications can be divided into two types classifiers if shiny then diamond and controllers if shiny then pick up. Controllers do, however, also classify conditions before inferring actions, and therefore classification forms a central part of many AI systems. Classifiers are functions that use pattern matching to determine a closest match. They can be tuned according to examples, making them very attractive for use in AI. These examples are known as observations or patterns. In supervised learning, each pattern belongs to a certain predefined class. A class can be seen as a decision that has to be made. All the observations combined with their class labels are known as a data set. When a new observation is received, that observation is classified based on previous experience. 208  A classifier can be trained in various ways there are many statistical and machine learning approaches. The decision tree 209  is perhaps the most widely used machine learning algorithm. 210  Other widely used classifiers are the neural network , 211  k-nearest neighbor algorithm , g  213  kernel methods such as the support vector machine SVM, h  215  Gaussian mixture model , 216  and the extremely popular naive Bayes classifier . i  218  Classifier performance depends greatly on the characteristics of the data to be classified, such as the dataset size, distribution of samples across classes, the dimensionality, and the level of noise. Model-based classifiers perform well if the assumed model is an extremely good fit for the actual data. Otherwise, if no matching model is available, and if accuracy rather than speed or scalability is the sole concern, conventional wisdom is that discriminative classifiers especially SVM tend to be more accurate than model-based classifiers such as naive Bayes on most practical data sets. 219  220  Artificial neural networks  edit  Main articles Artificial neural network and Connectionism A neural network is an interconnected group of nodes, akin to the vast network of neurons in the human brain . Neural networks were inspired by the architecture of neurons in the human brain. A simple neuron N accepts input from multiple other neurons, each of which, when activated or fired, cast a weighted vote for or against whether neuron N should itself activate. Learning requires an algorithm to adjust these weights based on the training data one simple algorithm dubbed  fire together, wire together  is to increase the weight between two connected neurons when the activation of one triggers the successful activation of another. The neural network forms concepts that are distributed among a subnetwork of shared j  neurons that tend to fire together a concept meaning leg might be coupled with a subnetwork meaning foot that includes the sound for foot. Neurons have a continuous spectrum of activation in addition, neurons can process inputs in a nonlinear way rather than weighing straightforward votes. Modern neural networks can learn both continuous functions and, surprisingly, digital logical operations. Neural networks early successes included predicting the stock market and in 1995 a mostly self-driving car. k  221  In the 2010s, advances in neural networks using deep learning thrust AI into widespread public consciousness and contributed to an enormous upshift in corporate AI spending for example, AI-related M A in 2017 was over 25 times as large as in 2015. 222  223  The study of non-learning artificial neural networks 211  began in the decade before the field of AI research was founded, in the work of Walter Pitts and Warren McCullouch . Frank Rosenblatt invented the perceptron , a learning network with a single layer, similar to the old concept of linear regression . Early pioneers also include Alexey Grigorevich Ivakhnenko , Teuvo Kohonen , Stephen Grossberg , Kunihiko Fukushima , Christoph von der Malsburg, David Willshaw, Shun-Ichi Amari , Bernard Widrow , John Hopfield , Eduardo R. Caianiello , and others  citation needed  . The main categories of networks are acyclic or feedforward neural networks where the signal passes in only one direction and recurrent neural networks which allow feedback and short-term memories of previous input events. Among the most popular feedforward networks are perceptrons , multi-layer perceptrons and radial basis networks . 224  Neural networks can be applied to the problem of intelligent control for robotics or learning , using such techniques as Hebbian learning fire together, wire together, GMDH or competitive learning . 225  Today, neural networks are often trained by the backpropagation algorithm, which had been around since 1970 as the reverse mode of automatic differentiation published by Seppo Linnainmaa , 226  227  and was introduced to neural networks by Paul Werbos . 228  229  230  Hierarchical temporal memory is an approach that models some of the structural and algorithmic properties of the neocortex . 231  To summarize, most neural networks use some form of gradient descent on a hand-created neural topology. However, some research groups, such as Uber , argue that simple neuroevolution to mutate new neural network topologies and weights may be competitive with sophisticated gradient descent approaches  citation needed  . One advantage of neuroevolution is that it may be less prone to get caught in dead ends. 232  Deep feedforward neural networks  edit  Main article Deep learning Deep learning is any artificial neural network that can learn a long chain of causal links  dubious  discuss  . For example, a feedforward network with six hidden layers can learn a seven-link causal chain six hidden layers  output layer and has a credit assignment path CAP depth of seven  citation needed  . Many deep learning systems need to be able to learn chains ten or more causal links in length. 233  Deep learning has transformed many important subfields of artificial intelligence  why  , including computer vision , speech recognition , natural language processing and others. 234  235  233  According to one overview, 236  the expression Deep Learning was introduced to the machine learning community by Rina Dechter in 1986 237  and gained traction after Igor Aizenberg and colleagues introduced it to artificial neural networks in 2000. 238  The first functional Deep Learning networks were published by Alexey Grigorevich Ivakhnenko and V. G. Lapa in 1965. 239   page  needed  These networks are trained one layer at a time. Ivakhnenkos 1971 paper 240  describes the learning of a deep feedforward multilayer perceptron with eight layers, already much deeper than many later networks. In 2006, a publication by Geoffrey Hinton and Ruslan Salakhutdinov introduced another way of pre-training many-layered feedforward neural networks FNNs one layer at a time, treating each layer in turn as an unsupervised restricted Boltzmann machine , then using supervised backpropagation for fine-tuning. 241  Similar to shallow artificial neural networks, deep neural networks can model complex non-linear relationships. Over the last few years, advances in both machine learning algorithms and computer hardware have led to more efficient methods for training deep neural networks that contain many layers of non-linear hidden units and a very large output layer. 242  Deep learning often uses convolutional neural networks CNNs, whose origins can be traced back to the Neocognitron introduced by Kunihiko Fukushima in 1980. 243  In 1989, Yann LeCun and colleagues applied backpropagation to such an architecture. In the early 2000s, in an industrial application CNNs already processed an estimated 10 to 20 of all the checks written in the US. 244  Since 2011, fast implementations of CNNs on GPUs have won many visual pattern recognition competitions. 233  CNNs with 12 convolutional layers were used in conjunction with reinforcement learning by Deepminds  AlphaGo Lee, the program that beat a top Go champion in 2016. 245  Deep recurrent neural networks  edit  Main article Recurrent neural networks Early on, deep learning was also applied to sequence learning with recurrent neural networks RNNs 246  which are in theory Turing complete 247  and can run arbitrary programs to process arbitrary sequences of inputs. The depth of an RNN is unlimited and depends on the length of its input sequence thus, an RNN is an example of deep learning. 233  RNNs can be trained by gradient descent 248  249  250  but suffer from the vanishing gradient problem . 234  251  In 1992, it was shown that unsupervised pre-training of a stack of recurrent neural networks can speed up subsequent supervised learning of deep sequential problems. 252  Numerous researchers now use variants of a deep learning recurrent NN called the long short-term memory LSTM network published by Hochreiter  Schmidhuber in 1997. 253  LSTM is often trained by Connectionist Temporal Classification CTC. 254  At Google, Microsoft and Baidu this approach has revolutionised speech recognition . 255  256  257  For example, in 2015, Googles speech recognition experienced a dramatic performance jump of 49 through CTC-trained LSTM, which is now available through Google Voice to billions of smartphone users. 258  Google also used LSTM to improve machine translation, 259  Language Modeling 260  and Multilingual Language Processing. 261  LSTM combined with CNNs also improved automatic image captioning 262  and a plethora of other applications. Evaluating progress  edit  Further information Progress in artificial intelligence and Competitions and prizes in artificial intelligence AI, like electricity or the steam engine, is a general purpose technology. There is no consensus on how to characterize which tasks AI tends to excel at. 263  While projects such as AlphaZero have succeeded in generating their own knowledge from scratch, many other machine learning projects require large training datasets. 264  265  Researcher Andrew Ng has suggested, as a highly imperfect rule of thumb, that almost anything a typical human can do with less than one second of mental thought, we can probably now or in the near future automate using AI. 266  Moravecs paradox suggests that AI lags humans at many tasks that the human brain has specifically evolved to perform well. 129  Games provide a well-publicized benchmark for assessing rates of progress. AlphaGo around 2016 brought the era of classical board-game benchmarks to a close. Games of imperfect knowledge provide new challenges to AI in the area of game theory . 267  268  E-sports such as StarCraft continue to provide additional public benchmarks. 269  270  There are many competitions and prizes, such as the Imagenet Challenge , to promote research in artificial intelligence. The most common areas of competition include general machine intelligence, conversational behavior, data-mining, robotic cars , and robot soccer as well as conventional games. 271  The imitation game an interpretation of the 1950 Turing test that assesses whether a computer can imitate a human is nowadays considered too exploitable to be a meaningful benchmark. 272  A derivative of the Turing test is the Completely Automated Public Turing test to tell Computers and Humans Apart  CAPTCHA . As the name implies, this helps to determine that a user is an actual person and not a computer posing as a human. In contrast to the standard Turing test, CAPTCHA is administered by a machine and targeted to a human as opposed to being administered by a human and targeted to a machine. A computer asks a user to complete a simple test then generates a grade for that test. Computers are unable to solve the problem, so correct solutions are deemed to be the result of a person taking the test. A common type of CAPTCHA is the test that requires the typing of distorted letters, numbers or symbols that appear in an image undecipherable by a computer. 273  Proposed universal intelligence tests aim to compare how well machines, humans, and even non-human animals perform on problem sets that are generic as possible. At an extreme, the test suite can contain every possible problem, weighted by Kolmogorov complexity  unfortunately, these problem sets tend to be dominated by impoverished pattern-matching exercises where a tuned AI can easily exceed human performance levels. 274  275  Applications  edit  An automated online assistant providing customer service on a web page  one of many very primitive applications of artificial intelligence Main article Applications of artificial intelligence AI is relevant to any intellectual task. 276  Modern artificial intelligence techniques are pervasive and are too numerous to list here. Frequently, when a technique reaches mainstream use, it is no longer considered artificial intelligence this phenomenon is described as the AI effect . 277  High-profile examples of AI include autonomous vehicles such as drones and self-driving cars , medical diagnosis, creating art such as poetry, proving mathematical theorems, playing games such as Chess or Go, search engines such as Google search , online assistants such as Siri , image recognition in photographs, spam filtering, predicting flight delays, 278  prediction of judicial decisions 279  and targeting online advertisements. 276  280  281  With social media sites overtaking TV as a source for news for young people and news organizations increasingly reliant on social media platforms for generating distribution, 282  major publishers now use artificial intelligence AI technology to post stories more effectively and generate higher volumes of traffic. 283  Healthcare  edit  Main article Artificial intelligence in healthcare A patient-side surgical arm of Da Vinci Surgical System AI in healthcare is often used for classification, whether to automate initial evaluation of a CT scan or EKG or to identify high risk patients for population health. The breadth of applications is rapidly increasing. As an example, AI is being applied to the high cost problem of dosage issueswhere findings suggested that AI could save 16 billion. In 2016, a ground breaking study in California found that a mathematical formula developed with the help of AI correctly determined the accurate dose of immunosuppressant drugs to give to organ patients. 284  X-ray of a hand, with automatic calculation of bone age by computer software Artificial intelligence is assisting doctors. According to Bloomberg Technology, Microsoft has developed AI to help doctors find the right treatments for cancer. 285  There is a great amount of research and drugs developed relating to cancer. In detail, there are more than 800 medicines and vaccines to treat cancer. This negatively affects the doctors, because there are too many options to choose from, making it more difficult to choose the right drugs for the patients. Microsoft is working on a project to develop a machine called Hanover  citation needed  . Its goal is to memorize all the papers necessary to cancer and help predict which combinations of drugs will be most effective for each patient. One project that is being worked on at the moment is fighting myeloid leukemia , a fatal cancer where the treatment has not improved in decades. Another study was reported to have found that artificial intelligence was as good as trained doctors in identifying skin cancers. 286  Another study is using artificial intelligence to try and monitor multiple high-risk patients, and this is done by asking each patient numerous questions based on data acquired from live doctor to patient interactions. 287  One study was done with transfer learning, the machine performed a diagnosis similarly to a well-trained ophthalmologist, and could generate a decision within 30 seconds on whether or not the patient should be referred for treatment, with more than 95 accuracy. 288  According to CNN , a recent study by surgeons at the Childrens National Medical Center in Washington successfully demonstrated surgery with an autonomous robot. The team supervised the robot while it performed soft-tissue surgery, stitching together a pigs bowel during open surgery, and doing so better than a human surgeon, the team claimed. 289  IBM has created its own artificial intelligence computer, the IBM Watson , which has beaten human intelligence at some levels. Watson has struggled to achieve success and adoption in healthcare. 290  Automotive  edit  Main article driverless cars Advancements in AI have contributed to the growth of the automotive industry through the creation and evolution of self-driving vehicles. As of 2016 update  , there are over 30 companies utilizing AI into the creation of driverless cars . A few companies involved with AI include Tesla , Google , and Apple . 291  Many components contribute to the functioning of self-driving cars. These vehicles incorporate systems such as braking, lane changing, collision prevention, navigation and mapping. Together, these systems, as well as high performance computers, are integrated into one complex vehicle. 292  Recent developments in autonomous automobiles have made the innovation of self-driving trucks possible, though they are still in the testing phase. The UK government has passed legislation to begin testing of self-driving truck platoons in 2018. 293  Self-driving truck platoons are a fleet of self-driving trucks following the lead of one non-self-driving truck, so the truck platoons arent entirely autonomous yet. Meanwhile, the Daimler, a German automobile corporation, is testing the Freightliner Inspiration which is a semi-autonomous truck that will only be used on the highway. 294  One main factor that influences the ability for a driver-less automobile to function is mapping. In general, the vehicle would be pre-programmed with a map of the area being driven. This map would include data on the approximations of street light and curb heights in order for the vehicle to be aware of its surroundings. However, Google has been working on an algorithm with the purpose of eliminating the need for pre-programmed maps and instead, creating a device that would be able to adjust to a variety of new surroundings. 295  Some self-driving cars are not equipped with steering wheels or brake pedals, so there has also been research focused on creating an algorithm that is capable of maintaining a safe environment for the passengers in the vehicle through awareness of speed and driving conditions. 296  Another factor that is influencing the ability for a driver-less automobile is the safety of the passenger. To make a driver-less automobile, engineers must program it to handle high-risk situations. These situations could include a head-on collision with pedestrians. The cars main goal should be to make a decision that would avoid hitting the pedestrians and saving the passengers in the car. But there is a possibility the car would need to make a decision that would put someone in danger. In other words, the car would need to decide to save the pedestrians or the passengers. 297  The programming of the car in these situations is crucial to a successful driver-less automobile. Finance and economics  edit  Financial institutions have long used artificial neural network systems to detect charges or claims outside of the norm, flagging these for human investigation. The use of AI in banking can be traced back to 1987 when Security Pacific National Bank in US set-up a Fraud Prevention Task force to counter the unauthorized use of debit cards  citation needed  . Programs like Kasisto and Moneystream are using AI in financial services. Banks use artificial intelligence systems today to organize operations, maintain book-keeping, invest in stocks, and manage properties. AI can react to changes overnight or when business is not taking place. 298  In August 2001, robots beat humans in a simulated financial trading competition. 299  AI has also reduced fraud and financial crimes by monitoring behavioral patterns of users for any abnormal changes or anomalies. 300  301  302  AI is also being used by corporations . Whereas AI CEO s are still 30 years away 303  304  , robotic process automation RPA is allready being used today in corporate finance. RPA uses artificial intelligence to train and teach software robots to process transactions, monitor compliance and audit processes automatically. 305  The use of AI machines in the market in applications such as online trading and decision making has changed major economic theories. 306  For example, AI based buying and selling platforms have changed the law of supply and demand in that it is now possible to easily estimate individualized demand and supply curves and thus individualized pricing. Furthermore, AI machines reduce information asymmetry in the market and thus making markets more efficient while reducing the volume of trades  citation needed  . Furthermore, AI in the markets limits the consequences of behavior in the markets again making markets more efficient  citation needed  . Other theories where AI has had impact include in rational choice , rational expectations , game theory , Lewis turning point , portfolio optimization and counterfactual thinking  citation needed  . Government  edit  Main article Artificial intelligence in government See also Mass surveillance in China Artificial intelligence paired with facial recognition systems may be used for mass surveillance. This is already the case in some parts of China. 307  308  An artificial intelligence has also competed in the Tama City mayoral elections in 2018. Video games  edit  Main article Artificial intelligence video games In video games, artificial intelligence is routinely used to generate dynamic purposeful behavior in non-player characters NPCs. In addition, well-understood AI techniques are routinely used for pathfinding . Some researchers consider NPC AI in games to be a solved problem for most production tasks. Games with more atypical AI include the AI director of Left 4 Dead 2008 and the neuroevolutionary training of platoons in Supreme Commander 2 2010. 309  310  Military  edit  Further information Artificial intelligence arms race , Lethal autonomous weapon , and Unmanned combat aerial vehicle The main military applications of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning are to enhance C2, Communications, Sensors, Integration and Interoperability. 311  Artificial Intelligence technologies enables coordination of sensors and effectors, threat detection and identification, marking of enemy positions, target acquisition, coordination and deconfliction of distributed Join Fires between networked combat vehicles and tanks also inside Manned and Unmanned Teams MUM-T. 311  Worldwide annual military spending on robotics rose from US5.1 billion in 2010 to US7.5 billion in 2015. 312  313  Military drones capable of autonomous action are widely considered a useful asset. 314  Many artificial intelligence researchers seek to distance themselves from military applications of AI. 315  Audit  edit  For financial statements audit, AI makes continuous audit possible. AI tools could analyze many sets of different information immediately. The potential benefit would be the overall audit risk will be reduced, the level of assurance will be increased and the time duration of audit will be reduced. 316  Advertising  edit  It is possible to use AI to predict or generalize the behavior of customers from their digital footprints in order to target them with personalized promotions or build customer personas automatically. 317  A documented case reports that online gambling companies were using AI to improve customer targeting. 318  Moreover, the application of Personality computing AI models can help reducing the cost of advertising campaigns by adding psychological targeting to more traditional sociodemographic or behavioral targeting. 319  Art  edit  Further information Computer art Artificial Intelligence has inspired numerous creative applications including its usage to produce visual art. The exhibition Thinking Machines Art and Design in the Computer Age, 19591989 at MoMA 320  provides a good overview of the historical applications of AI for art, architecture, and design. Recent exhibitions showcasing the usage of AI to produce art include the Google-sponsored benefit and auction at the Gray Area Foundation in San Francisco, where artists experimented with the deepdream algorithm 321  and the exhibition Unhuman Art in the Age of AI, which took place in Los Angeles and Frankfurt in the fall of 2017. 322  323  In the spring of 2018, the Association of Computing Machinery dedicated a special magazine issue to the subject of computers and art highlighting the role of machine learning in the arts. 324  Philosophy and ethics  edit  Main articles Philosophy of artificial intelligence and Ethics of artificial intelligence There are three philosophical questions related to AI Is artificial general intelligence possible Can a machine solve any problem that a human being can solve using intelligence Or are there hard limits to what a machine can accomplish Are intelligent machines dangerous How can we ensure that machines behave ethically and that they are used ethically Can a machine have a mind , consciousness and mental states in exactly the same sense that human beings do Can a machine be sentient , and thus deserve certain rights Can a machine intentionally cause harm The limits of artificial general intelligence  edit  Main articles Philosophy of AI , Turing test , Physical symbol systems hypothesis , Dreyfus critique of AI , The Emperors New Mind , and AI effect Can a machine be intelligent Can it think Alan Turings polite convention We need not decide if a machine can think we need only decide if a machine can act as intelligently as a human being. This approach to the philosophical problems associated with artificial intelligence forms the basis of the Turing test . 325  The Dartmouth proposal Every aspect of learning or any other feature of intelligence can be so precisely described that a machine can be made to simulate it. This conjecture was printed in the proposal for the Dartmouth Conference of 1956. 326  Newell and Simons physical symbol system hypothesis A physical symbol system has the necessary and sufficient means of general intelligent action. Newell and Simon argue that intelligence consists of formal operations on symbols. 327  Hubert Dreyfus argued that, on the contrary, human expertise depends on unconscious instinct rather than conscious symbol manipulation and on having a feel for the situation rather than explicit symbolic knowledge. See Dreyfus critique of AI . 328  329  Gdelian arguments Gdel himself, 330  John Lucas in 1961 and Roger Penrose in a more detailed argument from 1989 onwards made highly technical arguments that human mathematicians can consistently see the truth of their own Gdel statements and therefore have computational abilities beyond that of mechanical Turing machines. 331  However, some people do not agree with the Gdelian arguments. 332  333  334  The artificial brain argument The brain can be simulated by machines and because brains are intelligent, simulated brains must also be intelligent thus machines can be intelligent. Hans Moravec , Ray Kurzweil and others have argued that it is technologically feasible to copy the brain directly into hardware and software and that such a simulation will be essentially identical to the original. 147  The AI effect Machines are already intelligent, but observers have failed to recognize it. When Deep Blue beat Garry Kasparov in chess, the machine was acting intelligently. However, onlookers commonly discount the behavior of an artificial intelligence program by arguing that it is not real intelligence after all thus real intelligence is whatever intelligent behavior people can do that machines still cannot. This is known as the AI Effect AI is whatever hasnt been done yet. Potential harm  edit  Widespread use of artificial intelligence could have unintended consequences that are dangerous or undesirable. Scientists from the Future of Life Institute , among others, described some short-term research goals to see how AI influences the economy, the laws and ethics that are involved with AI and how to minimize AI security risks. In the long-term, the scientists have proposed to continue optimizing function while minimizing possible security risks that come along with new technologies. 335  The potential negative effects of AI and automation are a major issue for Andrew Yang s presidential campaign. 336  Existential risk  edit  Main article Existential risk from artificial general intelligence Physicist Stephen Hawking , Microsoft founder Bill Gates , and SpaceX founder Elon Musk have expressed concerns about the possibility that AI could evolve to the point that humans could not control it, with Hawking theorizing that this could  spell the end of the human race . 337  338  339  .mw-parser-output .templatequoteoverflowhiddenmargin1em 0padding0 40px.mw-parser-output .templatequote .templatequoteciteline-height1.5emtext-alignleftpadding-left1.6emmargin-top0 The development of full artificial intelligence could spell the end of the human race. Once humans develop artificial intelligence, it will take off on its own and redesign itself at an ever-increasing rate. Humans, who are limited by slow biological evolution, couldnt compete and would be superseded.  Stephen Hawking 340  In his book Superintelligence , Nick Bostrom provides an argument that artificial intelligence will pose a threat to humankind. He argues that sufficiently intelligent AI, if it chooses actions based on achieving some goal, will exhibit convergent behavior such as acquiring resources or protecting itself from being shut down. If this AIs goals do not reflect humanitysone example is an AI told to compute as many digits of pi as possibleit might harm humanity in order to acquire more resources or prevent itself from being shut down, ultimately to better achieve its goal. Concern over risk from artificial intelligence has led to some high-profile donations and investments. A group of prominent tech titans including Peter Thiel , Amazon Web Services and Musk have committed 1billion to OpenAI , a nonprofit company aimed at championing responsible AI development. 341  The opinion of experts within the field of artificial intelligence is mixed, with sizable fractions both concerned and unconcerned by risk from eventual superhumanly-capable AI. 342  Other technology industry leaders believe that artificial intelligence is helpful in its current form and will continue to assist humans. Oracle CEO Mark Hurd has stated that AI will actually create more jobs, not less jobs as humans will be needed to manage AI systems. 343  Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg believes AI will unlock a huge amount of positive things, such as curing disease and increasing the safety of autonomous cars. 344  In January 2015, Elon Musk donated ten million dollars to the Future of Life Institute to fund research on understanding AI decision making. The goal of the institute is to grow wisdom with which we manage the growing power of technology. Musk also funds companies developing artificial intelligence such as Google DeepMind and Vicarious to just keep an eye on whats going on with artificial intelligence. 345  I think there is potentially a dangerous outcome there. 346  347  For this danger to be realized, the hypothetical AI would have to overpower or out-think all of humanity, which a minority of experts argue is a possibility far enough in the future to not be worth researching. 348  349  Other counterarguments revolve around humans being either intrinsically or convergently valuable from the perspective of an artificial intelligence. 350  Devaluation of humanity  edit  Main article Computer Power and Human Reason Joseph Weizenbaum wrote that AI applications cannot, by definition, successfully simulate genuine human empathy and that the use of AI technology in fields such as customer service or psychotherapy 351  was deeply misguided. Weizenbaum was also bothered that AI researchers and some philosophers were willing to view the human mind as nothing more than a computer program a position is now known as computationalism . To Weizenbaum these points suggest that AI research devalues human life. 352  Social justice  edit  One concern is that AI programs may be programmed to be biased against certain groups, such as women and minorities, because most of the developers are wealthy Caucasian men. 353  Support for artificial intelligence is higher among men with 47 approving than women 35 approving. Algorithms have a host of applications in todays legal system already, assisting officials ranging from judges to parole officers and public defenders in gauging the predicted likelihood of recidivism of defendants. 354  COMPAS an acronym for Correctional Offender Management Profiling for Alternative Sanctions counts among the most widely utilized commercially available solutions. 354  It has been suggested that COMPAS assigns an exceptionally elevated risk of recidivism to black defendants while, conversely, ascribing low risk estimate to white defendants significantly more often than statistically expected. 354  Decrease in demand for human labor  edit  Further information Technological unemployment   21st century The relationship between automation and employment is complicated. While automation eliminates old jobs, it also creates new jobs through micro-economic and macro-economic effects. 355  Unlike previous waves of automation, many middle-class jobs may be eliminated by artificial intelligence The Economist states that the worry that AI could do to white-collar jobs what steam power did to blue-collar ones during the Industrial Revolution is worth taking seriously. 356  Subjective estimates of the risk vary widely for example, Michael Osborne and Carl Benedikt Frey estimate 47 of U.S. jobs are at high risk of potential automation, while an OECD report classifies only 9 of U.S. jobs as high risk. 357  358  359  Jobs at extreme risk range from paralegals to fast food cooks, while job demand is likely to increase for care-related professions ranging from personal healthcare to the clergy. 360  Author Martin Ford and others go further and argue that a large number of jobs are routine, repetitive and to an AI predictable Ford warns that these jobs may be automated in the next couple of decades, and that many of the new jobs may not be accessible to people with average capability, even with retraining. Economists point out that in the past technology has tended to increase rather than reduce total employment, but acknowledge that were in uncharted territory with AI. 22  Autonomous weapons  edit  See also Lethal autonomous weapon Currently, 50 countries are researching battlefield robots, including the United States, China, Russia, and the United Kingdom. Many people concerned about risk from superintelligent AI also want to limit the use of artificial soldiers and drones. 361  Ethical machines  edit  Machines with intelligence have the potential to use their intelligence to prevent harm and minimize the risks they may have the ability to use ethical reasoning to better choose their actions in the world. Research in this area includes machine ethics , artificial moral agents , and friendly AI . Artificial moral agents  edit  Wendell Wallach introduced the concept of artificial moral agents AMA in his book Moral Machines 362  For Wallach, AMAs have become a part of the research landscape of artificial intelligence as guided by its two central questions which he identifies as Does Humanity Want Computers Making Moral Decisions 363  and Can Robots Really Be Moral. 364  For Wallach the question is not centered on the issue of whether machines can demonstrate the equivalent of moral behavior in contrast to the constraints which society may place on the development of AMAs. 365  Machine ethics  edit  Main article Machine ethics The field of machine ethics is concerned with giving machines ethical principles, or a procedure for discovering a way to resolve the ethical dilemmas they might encounter, enabling them to function in an ethically responsible manner through their own ethical decision making. 366  The field was delineated in the AAAI Fall 2005 Symposium on Machine Ethics Past research concerning the relationship between technology and ethics has largely focused on responsible and irresponsible use of technology by human beings, with a few people being interested in how human beings ought to treat machines. In all cases, only human beings have engaged in ethical reasoning. The time has come for adding an ethical dimension to at least some machines. Recognition of the ethical ramifications of behavior involving machines, as well as recent and potential developments in machine autonomy, necessitate this. In contrast to computer hacking, software property issues, privacy issues and other topics normally ascribed to computer ethics, machine ethics is concerned with the behavior of machines towards human users and other machines. Research in machine ethics is key to alleviating concerns with autonomous systemsit could be argued that the notion of autonomous machines without such a dimension is at the root of all fear concerning machine intelligence. Further, investigation of machine ethics could enable the discovery of problems with current ethical theories, advancing our thinking about Ethics. 367  Machine ethics is sometimes referred to as machine morality, computational ethics or computational morality. A variety of perspectives of this nascent field can be found in the collected edition Machine Ethics 366  that stems from the AAAI Fall 2005 Symposium on Machine Ethics. 367  Malevolent and friendly AI  edit  Main article Friendly AI Political scientist Charles T. Rubin believes that AI can be neither designed nor guaranteed to be benevolent. 368  He argues that any sufficiently advanced benevolence may be indistinguishable from malevolence. Humans should not assume machines or robots would treat us favorably because there is no a priori reason to believe that they would be sympathetic to our system of morality, which has evolved along with our particular biology which AIs would not share. Hyper-intelligent software may not necessarily decide to support the continued existence of humanity and would be extremely difficult to stop. This topic has also recently begun to be discussed in academic publications as a real source of risks to civilization, humans, and planet Earth. One proposal to deal with this is to ensure that the first generally intelligent AI is  Friendly AI  and will be able to control subsequently developed AIs. Some question whether this kind of check could actually remain in place. Leading AI researcher Rodney Brooks writes, I think it is a mistake to be worrying about us developing malevolent AI anytime in the next few hundred years. I think the worry stems from a fundamental error in not distinguishing the difference between the very real recent advances in a particular aspect of AI, and the enormity and complexity of building sentient volitional intelligence. 369  Machine consciousness, sentience and mind  edit  Main article Artificial consciousness If an AI system replicates all key aspects of human intelligence, will that system also be sentient will it have a mind which has conscious experiences  This question is closely related to the philosophical problem as to the nature of human consciousness, generally referred to as the hard problem of consciousness . Consciousness  edit  Main articles Hard problem of consciousness and Theory of mind David Chalmers identified two problems in understanding the mind, which he named the hard and easy problems of consciousness. 370  The easy problem is understanding how the brain processes signals, makes plans and controls behavior. The hard problem is explaining how this feels or why it should feel like anything at all. Human information processing is easy to explain, however human subjective experience is difficult to explain. For example, consider what happens when a person is shown a color swatch and identifies it, saying its red. The easy problem only requires understanding the machinery in the brain that makes it possible for a person to know that the color swatch is red. The hard problem is that people also know something elsethey also know what red looks like . Consider that a person born blind can know that something is red without knowing what red looks like. l  Everyone knows subjective experience exists, because they do it every day e.g., all sighted people know what red looks like. The hard problem is explaining how the brain creates it, why it exists, and how it is different from knowledge and other aspects of the brain. Computationalism and functionalism  edit  Main articles Computationalism and Functionalism philosophy of mind Computationalism is the position in the philosophy of mind that the human mind or the human brain or both is an information processing system and that thinking is a form of computing. 371  Computationalism argues that the relationship between mind and body is similar or identical to the relationship between software and hardware and thus may be a solution to the mind-body problem . This philosophical position was inspired by the work of AI researchers and cognitive scientists in the 1960s and was originally proposed by philosophers Jerry Fodor and Hilary Putnam . Strong AI hypothesis  edit  Main article Chinese room The philosophical position that John Searle has named strong AI states The appropriately programmed computer with the right inputs and outputs would thereby have a mind in exactly the same sense human beings have minds. 372  Searle counters this assertion with his Chinese room argument, which asks us to look inside the computer and try to find where the mind might be. 373  Robot rights  edit  Main article Robot rights If a machine can be created that has intelligence, could it also feel  If it can feel, does it have the same rights as a human This issue, now known as  robot rights , is currently being considered by, for example, Californias Institute for the Future , although many critics believe that the discussion is premature. 374  Some critics of transhumanism argue that any hypothetical robot rights would lie on a spectrum with animal rights and human rights. 375  The subject is profoundly discussed in the 2010 documentary film Plug  Pray , 376  and many sci fi media such as Star Trek Next Generation, with the character of Commander Data , who fought being disassembled for research, and wanted to become human, and the robotic holograms in Voyager. Superintelligence  edit  Main article Superintelligence Are there limits to how intelligent machinesor human-machine hybridscan be A superintelligence, hyperintelligence, or superhuman intelligence is a hypothetical agent that would possess intelligence far surpassing that of the brightest and most gifted human mind. Superintelligence may also refer to the form or degree of intelligence possessed by such an agent. 141  Technological singularity  edit  Main articles Technological singularity and Moores law If research into Strong AI produced sufficiently intelligent software, it might be able to reprogram and improve itself. The improved software would be even better at improving itself, leading to recursive self-improvement . 377  The new intelligence could thus increase exponentially and dramatically surpass humans. Science fiction writer Vernor Vinge named this scenario  singularity . 378  Technological singularity is when accelerating progress in technologies will cause a runaway effect wherein artificial intelligence will exceed human intellectual capacity and control, thus radically changing or even ending civilization. Because the capabilities of such an intelligence may be impossible to comprehend, the technological singularity is an occurrence beyond which events are unpredictable or even unfathomable. 378  141  Ray Kurzweil has used Moores law which describes the relentless exponential improvement in digital technology to calculate that desktop computers will have the same processing power as human brains by the year 2029, and predicts that the singularity will occur in 2045. 378  Transhumanism  edit  Main article Transhumanism Robot designer Hans Moravec , cyberneticist Kevin Warwick and inventor Ray Kurzweil have predicted that humans and machines will merge in the future into cyborgs that are more capable and powerful than either. 379  This idea, called transhumanism , which has roots in Aldous Huxley and Robert Ettinger . Edward Fredkin argues that artificial intelligence is the next stage in evolution, an idea first proposed by Samuel Butler s  Darwin among the Machines  as far back as 1863, and expanded upon by George Dyson in his book of the same name in 1998. 380  Economics  edit  The long-term economic effects of AI are uncertain. A survey of economists showed disagreement about whether the increasing use of robots and AI will cause a substantial increase in long-term unemployment , but they generally agree that it could be a net benefit, if productivity gains are redistributed . 381  In fiction  edit  Main article Artificial intelligence in fiction The word robot itself was coined by Karel apek in his 1921 play R.U.R. , the title standing for  Rossums Universal Robots  Thought-capable artificial beings appeared as storytelling devices since antiquity, 24  and have been a persistent theme in science fiction . A common trope in these works began with Mary Shelley s Frankenstein , where a human creation becomes a threat to its masters. This includes such works as Arthur C. Clarkes and Stanley Kubricks 2001 A Space Odyssey both 1968, with HAL 9000 , the murderous computer in charge of the Discovery One spaceship, as well as The Terminator 1984 and The Matrix 1999. In contrast, the rare loyal robots such as Gort from The Day the Earth Stood Still 1951 and Bishop from Aliens 1986 are less prominent in popular culture. 382  Isaac Asimov introduced the Three Laws of Robotics in many books and stories, most notably the Multivac series about a super-intelligent computer of the same name. Asimovs laws are often brought up during lay discussions of machine ethics 383  while almost all artificial intelligence researchers are familiar with Asimovs laws through popular culture, they generally consider the laws useless for many reasons, one of which is their ambiguity. 384  Transhumanism the merging of humans and machines is explored in the manga Ghost in the Shell and the science-fiction series Dune . In the 1980s, artist Hajime Sorayama s Sexy Robots series were painted and published in Japan depicting the actual organic human form with lifelike muscular metallic skins and later the Gynoids book followed that was used by or influenced movie makers including George Lucas and other creatives. Sorayama never considered these organic robots to be real part of nature but always unnatural product of the human mind, a fantasy existing in the mind even when realized in actual form. Several works use AI to force us to confront the fundamental of question of what makes us human, showing us artificial beings that have the ability to feel , and thus to suffer. This appears in Karel apek s  R.U.R. , the films  A.I. Artificial Intelligence  and  Ex Machina , as well as the novel Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep , by Philip K. Dick . Dick considers the idea that our understanding of human subjectivity is altered by technology created with artificial intelligence. 385  See also  edit  Abductive reasoning A.I. Rising Artificial intelligence arms race Behavior selection algorithm Business process automation Case-based reasoning Commonsense reasoning Emergent algorithm Evolutionary computation Glossary of artificial intelligence Machine learning Mathematical optimization Multi-agent system Personality computing Robotic process automation Soft computing Universal basic income Weak AI Explanatory notes  edit   The act of doling out rewards can itself be formalized or automated into a  reward function .  Terminology varies see algorithm characterizations .  Adversarial vulnerabilities can also result in nonlinear systems, or from non-pattern perturbations. Some systems are so brittle that changing a single adversarial pixel predictably induces misclassification.  While such a victory of the neats may be a consequence of the field becoming more mature, AIMA states that in practice both neat and scruffy approaches continue to be necessary in AI research.  There exist many different types of uncertainty, vagueness, and ignorance... We independently confirm the inadequacy of systems for reasoning about uncertainty that propagates numerical factors according to only to which connectives appear in assertions. 192   Expectation-maximization, one of the most popular algorithms in machine learning, allows clustering in the presence of unknown latent variables 201   The most widely used analogical AI until the mid-1990s 212   SVM displaced k-nearest neighbor in the 1990s 214   Naive Bayes is reportedly the most widely used learner at Google, due in part to its scalability. 217   Each individual neuron is likely to participate in more than one concept.  Steering for the 1995  No Hands Across America  required only a few human assists.  This is based on Marys Room , a thought experiment first proposed by Frank Jackson in 1982 References  edit   Russell  Norvig 2009 , p.  2.  McCorduck 2004 , p.  204  Maloof, Mark. Artificial Intelligence An Introduction, p. 37 PDF . georgetown.edu . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Schank, Roger C. 1991. Wheres the AI. AI magazine . Vol.  12 no.  4. p.  38.  a b Russell  Norvig 2009 .  a b AlphaGo  Google DeepMind . Archived from the original on 10 March 2016. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Kaplan Andreas Michael Haenlein 2018 Siri, Siri in my Hand, whos the Fairest in the Land On the Interpretations, Illustrations and Implications of Artificial Intelligence, Business Horizons, 621  a b Optimism of early AI Herbert Simon quote Simon 1965 , p.  96 quoted in Crevier 1993 , p.  109. Marvin Minsky quote Minsky 1967 , p.  2 quoted in Crevier 1993 , p.  109.  a b c Boom of the 1980s rise of expert systems , Fifth Generation Project , Alvey , MCC , SCI  McCorduck 2004 , pp.  426441 Crevier 1993 , pp.  161162,197203, 211, 240 Russell  Norvig 2003 , p.  24 NRC 1999 , pp.  210211  a b First AI Winter , Mansfield Amendment , Lighthill report Crevier 1993 , pp.  115117 Russell  Norvig 2003 , p.  22 NRC 1999 , pp.  212213 Howe 1994  a b Second AI winter  McCorduck 2004 , pp.  430435 Crevier 1993 , pp.  209210 NRC 1999 , pp.  214216  a b c AI becomes hugely successful in the early 21st century Clark 2015  a b Pamela McCorduck 2004 , pp.  424 writes of the rough shattering of AI in subfieldsvision, natural language, decision theory, genetic algorithms, robotics  ... and these with own sub-subfieldthat would hardly have anything to say to each other.  a b c This list of intelligent traits is based on the topics covered by the major AI textbooks, including Russell  Norvig 2003 Luger  Stubblefield 2004 Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998 Nilsson 1998  a b c Biological intelligence vs. intelligence in general Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  23, who make the analogy with aeronautical engineering . McCorduck 2004 , pp.  100101, who writes that there are two major branches of artificial intelligence one aimed at producing intelligent behavior regardless of how it was accomplished, and the other aimed at modeling intelligent processes found in nature, particularly human ones. Kolata 1982 , a paper in Science , which describes McCarthys indifference to biological models. Kolata quotes McCarthy as writing This is AI, so we dont care if its psychologically real Science . August 1982. . McCarthy recently reiterated his position at the AI50 conference where he said Artificial intelligence is not, by definition, simulation of human intelligence  Maker 2006 .  a b c Neats vs. scruffies  McCorduck 2004 , pp.  421424, 486489 Crevier 1993 , pp.  168 Nilsson 1983 , pp.  1011  a b Symbolic vs. sub-symbolic AI Nilsson 1998 , p.  7, who uses the term sub-symbolic.  a b General intelligence  strong AI  is discussed in popular introductions to AI Kurzweil 1999 and Kurzweil 2005  See the Dartmouth proposal , under Philosophy , below.  a b This is a central idea of Pamela McCorduck s Machines Who Think . She writes I like to think of artificial intelligence as the scientific apotheosis of a venerable cultural tradition.  McCorduck 2004 , p.  34 Artificial intelligence in one form or another is an idea that has pervaded Western intellectual history, a dream in urgent need of being realized.  McCorduck 2004 , p.  xviii Our history is full of attemptsnutty, eerie, comical, earnest, legendary and realto make artificial intelligences, to reproduce what is the essential usbypassing the ordinary means. Back and forth between myth and reality, our imaginations supplying what our workshops couldnt, we have engaged for a long time in this odd form of self-reproduction.  McCorduck 2004 , p.  3 She traces the desire back to its Hellenistic roots and calls it the urge to forge the Gods.  McCorduck 2004 , pp.  340400  Stephen Hawking believes AI could be mankinds last accomplishment . BetaNews . 21 October 2016. Archived from the original on 28 August 2017. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   a b Ford, Martin Colvin, Geoff 6 September 2015. Will robots create more jobs than they destroy . The Guardian . Retrieved 13 January 2018 .  a b AI applications widely used behind the scenes Russell  Norvig 2003 , p.  28 Kurzweil 2005 , p.  265 NRC 1999 , pp.  216222  a b AI in myth McCorduck 2004 , pp.  45 Russell  Norvig 2003 , p.  939  AI in early science fiction. McCorduck 2004 , pp.  1725  Formal reasoning Berlinski, David 2000. The Advent of the Algorithm . Harcourt Books. ISBN   978-0-15-601391-8 . OCLC   46890682 .  Artificial Intelligence . Encyclopedia of Emerging Industries . 30 November 2010 . Retrieved 23 July 2019 .  Russell  Norvig 2009 , p.  16.  Dartmouth conference  McCorduck 2004 , pp.  111136 Crevier 1993 , pp.  4749, who writes the conference is generally recognized as the official birthdate of the new science. Russell  Norvig 2003 , p.  17, who call the conference the birth of artificial intelligence. NRC 1999 , pp.  200201  Hegemony of the Dartmouth conference attendees Russell  Norvig 2003 , p.  17, who write for the next 20 years the field would be dominated by these people and their students. McCorduck 2004 , pp.  129130  Russell  Norvig 2003 , p.  18.  Schaeffer J. 2009 Didnt Samuel Solve That Game. In One Jump Ahead. Springer, Boston, MA  Samuel, A. L. July 1959. Some Studies in Machine Learning Using the Game of Checkers. IBM Journal of Research and Development . 3 3 210229. CiteSeerX   10.1.1.368.2254 . doi  10.1147rd.33.0210 .   Golden years  of AI successful symbolic reasoning programs 19561973 McCorduck 2004 , pp.  243252 Crevier 1993 , pp.  52107 Moravec 1988 , p.  9 Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  1821 The programs described are Arthur Samuel s checkers program for the IBM 701 , Daniel Bobrow s STUDENT , Newell and Simon s Logic Theorist and Terry Winograd s SHRDLU .  DARPA pours money into undirected pure research into AI during the 1960s McCorduck 2004 , pp.  131 Crevier 1993 , pp.  51, 6465 NRC 1999 , pp.  204205  AI in England Howe 1994  Lighthill 1973 .  a b Expert systems ACM 1998 , I.2.1 Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  2224 Luger  Stubblefield 2004 , pp.  227331 Nilsson 1998 , chpt. 17.4 McCorduck 2004 , pp.  327335, 434435 Crevier 1993 , pp.  14562, 197203  a b Formal methods are now preferred Victory of the neats  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  2526 McCorduck 2004 , pp.  486487  McCorduck 2004 , pp.  480483.  Markoff 2011 .  Ask the AI experts Whats driving todays progress in AI . McKinsey  Company . Retrieved 13 April 2018 .  Administrator. Kinects AI breakthrough explained . i-programmer.info . Archived from the original on 1 February 2016. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Rowinski, Dan 15 January 2013. Virtual Personal Assistants  The Future Of Your Smartphone Infographic  . ReadWrite . Archived from the original on 22 December 2015. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Artificial intelligence Googles AlphaGo beats Go master Lee Se-dol . BBC News . 12 March 2016. Archived from the original on 26 August 2016 . Retrieved 1 October 2016 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   After Win in China, AlphaGos Designers Explore New AI . Wired . 27 May 2017. Archived from the original on 2 June 2017. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Worlds Go Player Ratings . May 2017. Archived from the original on 1 April 2017. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   19  in Chinese. May 2017. Archived from the original on 11 August 2017. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   a b Clark, Jack 8 December 2015. Why 2015 Was a Breakthrough Year in Artificial Intelligence . Bloomberg News . Archived from the original on 23 November 2016 . Retrieved 23 November 2016 . After a half-decade of quiet breakthroughs in artificial intelligence, 2015 has been a landmark year. Computers are smarter and learning faster than ever. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Reshaping Business With Artificial Intelligence . MIT Sloan Management Review . Retrieved 2 May 2018 .  Lorica, Ben 18 December 2017. The state of AI adoption . OReilly Media . Retrieved 2 May 2018 .  Allen, Gregory 6 February 2019. Understanding Chinas AI Strategy . Center for a New American Security .  Review  How two AI superpowers  the U.S. and China  battle for supremacy in the field . Washington Post . 2 November 2018 . Retrieved 4 November 2018 .  at 1011, Alistair Dabbs 22 Feb 2019. Artificial Intelligence You know it isnt real, yeah . www.theregister.co.uk .  Stop Calling it Artificial Intelligence .  AI isnt taking over the world  it doesnt exist yet . GBG Global website .  a b Definition of AI as the study of intelligent agents  Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998 , p. 1 , which provides the version that is used in this article. Note that they use the term computational intelligence as a synonym for artificial intelligence. Russell  Norvig 2003 who prefer the term rational agent and write The whole-agent view is now widely accepted in the field  Russell  Norvig 2003 , p.  55. Nilsson 1998 Legg  Hutter 2007 .  Kaplan, Andreas Haenlein, Michael 1 January 2019. Siri, Siri, in my hand Whos the fairest in the land On the interpretations, illustrations, and implications of artificial intelligence. Business Horizons . 62 1 1525. doi  10.1016j.bushor.2018.08.004 .  Domingos 2015 , Chapter 5.  Domingos 2015 , Chapter 7.  Lindenbaum, M., Markovitch, S.,  Rusakov, D. 2004. Selective sampling for nearest neighbor classifiers. Machine learning, 542, 125152.  Domingos 2015 , Chapter 1.  a b Intractability and efficiency and the combinatorial explosion  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  9, 2122  Domingos 2015 , Chapter 2, Chapter 3.  Hart, P. E. Nilsson, N. J. Raphael, B. 1972. Correction to A Formal Basis for the Heuristic Determination of Minimum Cost Paths  . SIGART Newsletter 37 2829. doi  10.11451056777.1056779 .  Algorithm in Artificial Intelligence .  Domingos 2015 , Chapter 2, Chapter 4, Chapter 6.  Can neural network computers learn from experience, and if so, could they ever become what we would call smart . Scientific American . 2018 . Retrieved 24 March 2018 .  Domingos 2015 , Chapter 6, Chapter 7.  Domingos 2015 , p.  286.  Single pixel change fools AI programs . BBC News . 3 November 2017 . Retrieved 12 March 2018 .  AI Has a Hallucination Problem Thats Proving Tough to Fix . WIRED . 2018 . Retrieved 12 March 2018 .  Goodfellow, Ian J., Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial examples. arXiv preprint arXiv  1412.6572 2014.  Matti, D. Ekenel, H. K. Thiran, J. P. 2017. Combining LiDAR space clustering and convolutional neural networks for pedestrian detection . 2017 14th IEEE International Conference on Advanced Video and Signal Based Surveillance AVSS . pp.  16. arXiv  1710.06160 . doi  10.1109AVSS.2017.8078512 . ISBN   978-1-5386-2939-0 .  Ferguson, Sarah Luders, Brandon Grande, Robert C. How, Jonathan P. 2015. Real-Time Predictive Modeling and Robust Avoidance of Pedestrians with Uncertain, Changing Intentions . Algorithmic Foundations of Robotics XI . Springer Tracts in Advanced Robotics. 107 . Springer, Cham. pp.  161177. arXiv  1405.5581 . doi  10.1007978-3-319-16595-0_10 . ISBN   978-3-319-16594-3 .  Cultivating Common Sense  DiscoverMagazine.com . Discover Magazine . 2017 . Retrieved 24 March 2018 .  Davis, Ernest Marcus, Gary 24 August 2015. Commonsense reasoning and commonsense knowledge in artificial intelligence . Communications of the ACM . 58 9 92103. doi  10.11452701413 .  Winograd, Terry January 1972. Understanding natural language. Cognitive Psychology . 3 1 1191. doi  10.10160010-02857290002-3 .  Dont worry Autonomous cars arent coming tomorrow or next year . Autoweek . 2016 . Retrieved 24 March 2018 .  Knight, Will 2017. Boston may be famous for bad drivers, but its the testing ground for a smarter self-driving car . MIT Technology Review . Retrieved 27 March 2018 .  Prakken, Henry 31 August 2017. On the problem of making autonomous vehicles conform to traffic law. Artificial Intelligence and Law . 25 3 341363. doi  10.1007s10506-017-9210-0 .  Problem solving, puzzle solving, game playing and deduction Russell  Norvig 2003 , chpt. 39, Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998 , chpt. 2,3,7,9, Luger  Stubblefield 2004 , chpt. 3,4,6,8, Nilsson 1998 , chpt. 712  Uncertain reasoning Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  452644, Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998 , pp.  345395, Luger  Stubblefield 2004 , pp.  333381, Nilsson 1998 , chpt. 19  Psychological evidence of sub-symbolic reasoning Wason  Shapiro 1966 showed that people do poorly on completely abstract problems, but if the problem is restated to allow the use of intuitive social intelligence , performance dramatically improves. See Wason selection task  Kahneman, Slovic  Tversky 1982 have shown that people are terrible at elementary problems that involve uncertain reasoning. See list of cognitive biases for several examples. Lakoff  Nez 2000 have controversially argued that even our skills at mathematics depend on knowledge and skills that come from the body, i.e. sensorimotor and perceptual skills. See Where Mathematics Comes From   Knowledge representation  ACM 1998 , I.2.4, Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  320363, Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998 , pp.  2346, 6981, 169196, 235277, 281298, 319345, Luger  Stubblefield 2004 , pp.  227243, Nilsson 1998 , chpt. 18  Knowledge engineering  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  260266, Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998 , pp.  199233, Nilsson 1998 , chpt. 17.117.4  a b Representing categories and relations Semantic networks , description logics , inheritance including frames and scripts  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  349354, Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998 , pp.  174177, Luger  Stubblefield 2004 , pp.  248258, Nilsson 1998 , chpt. 18.3  a b Representing events and time Situation calculus , event calculus , fluent calculus including solving the frame problem  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  328341, Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998 , pp.  281298, Nilsson 1998 , chpt. 18.2  a b Causal calculus  Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998 , pp.  335337  a b Representing knowledge about knowledge Belief calculus, modal logics  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  341344, Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998 , pp.  275277  Sikos, Leslie F. June 2017. Description Logics in Multimedia Reasoning . Cham Springer. doi  10.1007978-3-319-54066-5 . ISBN   978-3-319-54066-5 . Archived from the original on 29 August 2017. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Ontology  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  320328  Smoliar, Stephen W. Zhang, HongJiang 1994. Content based video indexing and retrieval. IEEE Multimedia . 1 2 6272. doi  10.110993.311653 .  Neumann, Bernd Mller, Ralf January 2008. On scene interpretation with description logics. Image and Vision Computing . 26 1 82101. doi  10.1016j.imavis.2007.08.013 .  Kuperman, G. J. Reichley, R. M. Bailey, T. C. 1 July 2006. Using Commercial Knowledge Bases for Clinical Decision Support Opportunities, Hurdles, and Recommendations . Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association . 13 4 369371. doi  10.1197jamia.M2055 . PMC   1513681 . PMID   16622160 .  MCGARRY, KEN 1 December 2005. A survey of interestingness measures for knowledge discovery. The Knowledge Engineering Review . 20 1 39. doi  10.1017S0269888905000408 .  Bertini, M Del Bimbo, A Torniai, C 2006. Automatic annotation and semantic retrieval of video sequences using multimedia ontologies. MM 06 Proceedings of the 14th ACM international conference on Multimedia . 14th ACM international conference on Multimedia. Santa Barbara ACM. pp.  679682.  Qualification problem  McCarthy  Hayes 1969 Russell  Norvig 2003  page  needed  While McCarthy was primarily concerned with issues in the logical representation of actions, Russell  Norvig 2003 apply the term to the more general issue of default reasoning in the vast network of assumptions underlying all our commonsense knowledge.  a b Default reasoning and default logic , non-monotonic logics , circumscription , closed world assumption , abduction Poole et al. places abduction under default reasoning. Luger et al. places this under uncertain reasoning Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  354360, Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998 , pp.  248256, 323335, Luger  Stubblefield 2004 , pp.  335363, Nilsson 1998 , 18.3.3  Breadth of commonsense knowledge Russell  Norvig 2003 , p.  21, Crevier 1993 , pp.  113114, Moravec 1988 , p.  13, Lenat  Guha 1989 Introduction  Dreyfus  Dreyfus 1986 .  Gladwell 2005 .  a b Expert knowledge as embodied intuition Dreyfus  Dreyfus 1986  Hubert Dreyfus is a philosopher and critic of AI who was among the first to argue that most useful human knowledge was encoded sub-symbolically. See Dreyfus critique of AI  Gladwell 2005 Gladwells Blink is a popular introduction to sub-symbolic reasoning and knowledge. Hawkins  Blakeslee 2005 Hawkins argues that sub-symbolic knowledge should be the primary focus of AI research.  Planning  ACM 1998 , I.2.8, Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  375459, Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998 , pp.  281316, Luger  Stubblefield 2004 , pp.  314329, Nilsson 1998 , chpt. 10.12, 22  a b Information value theory  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  600604  Classical planning Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  375430, Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998 , pp.  281315, Luger  Stubblefield 2004 , pp.  314329, Nilsson 1998 , chpt. 10.12, 22  Planning and acting in non-deterministic domains conditional planning, execution monitoring, replanning and continuous planning Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  430449  Multi-agent planning and emergent behavior Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  449455  Alan Turing discussed the centrality of learning as early as 1950, in his classic paper  Computing Machinery and Intelligence . Turing 1950  In 1956, at the original Dartmouth AI summer conference, Ray Solomonoff wrote a report on unsupervised probabilistic machine learning An Inductive Inference Machine. Solomonoff 1956   This is a form of Tom Mitchell s widely quoted definition of machine learning A computer program is set to learn from an experience E with respect to some task T and some performance measure P if its performance on T as measured by P improves with experience E .  a b Learning  ACM 1998 , I.2.6, Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  649788, Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998 , pp.  397438, Luger  Stubblefield 2004 , pp.  385542, Nilsson 1998 , chpt. 3.3, 10.3, 17.5, 20  Jordan, M. I. Mitchell, T. M. 16 July 2015. Machine learning Trends, perspectives, and prospects. Science . 349 6245 255260. Bibcode  2015Sci...349..255J . doi  10.1126science.aaa8415 . PMID   26185243 .  Reinforcement learning  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  763788 Luger  Stubblefield 2004 , pp.  442449  Natural language processing  ACM 1998 , I.2.7 Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  790831 Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998 , pp.  91104 Luger  Stubblefield 2004 , pp.  591632  Versatile question answering systems seeing in synthesis Archived 1 February 2016 at the Wayback Machine , Mittal et al., IJIIDS, 52, 119142, 2011  Applications of natural language processing, including information retrieval i.e. text mining  and machine translation  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  840857, Luger  Stubblefield 2004 , pp.  623630  Cambria, Erik White, Bebo May 2014. Jumping NLP Curves A Review of Natural Language Processing Research Review Article. IEEE Computational Intelligence Magazine . 9 2 4857. doi  10.1109MCI.2014.2307227 .  Machine perception  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  537581, 863898 Nilsson 1998 , chpt. 6  Speech recognition  ACM 1998 , I.2.7 Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  568578  Object recognition  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  885892  Computer vision  ACM 1998 , I.2.10 Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  863898 Nilsson 1998 , chpt. 6  Robotics  ACM 1998 , I.2.9, Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  901942, Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998 , pp.  443460  a b Moving and configuration space  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  916932  a b Tecuci 2012 .  Robotic mapping localization, etc Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  908915  Cadena, Cesar Carlone, Luca Carrillo, Henry Latif, Yasir Scaramuzza, Davide Neira, Jose Reid, Ian Leonard, John J. December 2016. Past, Present, and Future of Simultaneous Localization and Mapping Toward the Robust-Perception Age. IEEE Transactions on Robotics . 32 6 13091332. arXiv  1606.05830 . Bibcode  2016arXiv160605830C . doi  10.1109TRO.2016.2624754 .  Moravec, Hans 1988. Mind Children . Harvard University Press. p.  15.  Chan, Szu Ping 15 November 2015. This is what will happen when robots take over the world . Retrieved 23 April 2018 .  a b IKEA furniture and the limits of AI . The Economist . 2018 . Retrieved 24 April 2018 .  Kismet .  Thompson, Derek 2018. What Jobs Will the Robots Take . The Atlantic . Retrieved 24 April 2018 .  Scassellati, Brian 2002. Theory of mind for a humanoid robot. Autonomous Robots . 12 1 1324. doi  10.1023A1013298507114 .  Cao, Yongcan Yu, Wenwu Ren, Wei Chen, Guanrong February 2013. An Overview of Recent Progress in the Study of Distributed Multi-Agent Coordination. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics . 9 1 427438. arXiv  1207.3231 . doi  10.1109TII.2012.2219061 .  Thro 1993 .  Edelson 1991 .  Tao  Tan 2005 .  Poria, Soujanya Cambria, Erik Bajpai, Rajiv Hussain, Amir September 2017. A review of affective computing From unimodal analysis to multimodal fusion. Information Fusion . 37  98125. doi  10.1016j.inffus.2017.02.003 . hdl  189325490 .  Emotion and affective computing  Minsky 2006  Waddell, Kaveh 2018. Chatbots Have Entered the Uncanny Valley . The Atlantic . Retrieved 24 April 2018 .  Pennachin, C. Goertzel, B. 2007. Contemporary Approaches to Artificial General Intelligence . Artificial General Intelligence. Cognitive Technologies . Cognitive Technologies. Berlin, Heidelberg Springer. doi  10.1007978-3-540-68677-4_1 . ISBN   978-3-540-23733-4 .  a b c Roberts, Jacob 2016. Thinking Machines The Search for Artificial Intelligence . Distillations . Vol.  2 no.  2. pp.  1423 . Retrieved 20 March 2018 .  The superhero of artificial intelligence can this genius keep it in check . the Guardian . 16 February 2016 . Retrieved 26 April 2018 .  Mnih, Volodymyr Kavukcuoglu, Koray Silver, David Rusu, Andrei A. Veness, Joel Bellemare, Marc G. Graves, Alex Riedmiller, Martin Fidjeland, Andreas K. Ostrovski, Georg Petersen, Stig Beattie, Charles Sadik, Amir Antonoglou, Ioannis King, Helen Kumaran, Dharshan Wierstra, Daan Legg, Shane Hassabis, Demis 26 February 2015. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature . 518 7540 529533. Bibcode  2015Natur.518..529M . doi  10.1038nature14236 . PMID   25719670 .  Sample, Ian 14 March 2017. Googles DeepMind makes AI program that can learn like a human . the Guardian . Retrieved 26 April 2018 .  From not working to neural networking . The Economist . 2016 . Retrieved 26 April 2018 .  Domingos 2015 .  a b Artificial brain arguments AI requires a simulation of the operation of the human brain Russell  Norvig 2003 , p.  957 Crevier 1993 , pp.  271 and 279 A few of the people who make some form of the argument Moravec 1988 Kurzweil 2005 , p.  262 Hawkins  Blakeslee 2005 The most extreme form of this argument the brain replacement scenario was put forward by Clark Glymour in the mid-1970s and was touched on by Zenon Pylyshyn and John Searle in 1980.  Goertzel, Ben Lian, Ruiting Arel, Itamar de Garis, Hugo Chen, Shuo December 2010. A world survey of artificial brain projects, Part II Biologically inspired cognitive architectures. Neurocomputing . 74 13 3049. doi  10.1016j.neucom.2010.08.012 .  Nils Nilsson writes Simply put, there is wide disagreement in the field about what AI is all about  Nilsson 1983 , p.  10.  AIs immediate precursors McCorduck 2004 , pp.  51107 Crevier 1993 , pp.  2732 Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  15, 940 Moravec 1988 , p.  3  Haugeland 1985 , pp.  112117  The most dramatic case of sub-symbolic AI being pushed into the background was the devastating critique of perceptrons by Marvin Minsky and Seymour Papert in 1969. See History of AI , AI winter , or Frank Rosenblatt .  Cognitive simulation, Newell and Simon , AI at CMU then called Carnegie Tech  McCorduck 2004 , pp.  139179, 245250, 322323 EPAM Crevier 1993 , pp.  145149  Soar history McCorduck 2004 , pp.  450451 Crevier 1993 , pp.  258263  McCarthy and AI research at SAIL and SRI International  McCorduck 2004 , pp.  251259 Crevier 1993  AI research at Edinburgh and in France, birth of Prolog  Crevier 1993 , pp.  193196 Howe 1994  AI at MIT under Marvin Minsky in the 1960s   McCorduck 2004 , pp.  259305 Crevier 1993 , pp.  83102, 163176 Russell  Norvig 2003 , p.  19  Cyc  McCorduck 2004 , p.  489, who calls it a determinedly scruffy enterprise Crevier 1993 , pp.  239243 Russell  Norvig 2003 , p.  363365 Lenat  Guha 1989  Knowledge revolution McCorduck 2004 , pp.  266276, 298300, 314, 421 Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  2223  Frederick, Hayes-Roth William, Murray Leonard, Adelman. Expert systems. doi  10.10361097-8542.248550 . Cite journal requires journal  help   Embodied approaches to AI McCorduck 2004 , pp.  454462 Brooks 1990 Moravec 1988  Weng et al. 2001 .  Lungarella et al. 2003 .  Asada et al. 2009 .  Oudeyer 2010 .  Revival of connectionism  Crevier 1993 , pp.  214215 Russell  Norvig 2003 , p.  25  Computational intelligence IEEE Computational Intelligence Society Archived 9 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine  Hutson, Matthew 16 February 2018. Artificial intelligence faces reproducibility crisis . Science . pp.  725726. Bibcode  2018Sci...359..725H . doi  10.1126science.359.6377.725 . Retrieved 28 April 2018 .  Norvig 2012 .  Langley 2011 .  Katz 2012 .  The intelligent agent paradigm Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  27, 3258, 968972 Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998 , pp.  721 Luger  Stubblefield 2004 , pp.  235240 Hutter 2005 , pp.  125126 The definition used in this article, in terms of goals, actions, perception and environment, is due to Russell  Norvig 2003 . Other definitions also include knowledge and learning as additional criteria.  Agent architectures , hybrid intelligent systems  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  27, 932, 970972 Nilsson 1998 , chpt. 25  Hierarchical control system  Albus 2002  Laird, John 2008. Extending the Soar cognitive architecture. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Applications . 171  224. CiteSeerX   10.1.1.77.2473 .  Lieto, Antonio Lebiere, Christian Oltramari, Alessandro May 2018. The knowledge level in cognitive architectures Current limitations and possibile developments. Cognitive Systems Research . 48  3955. doi  10.1016j.cogsys.2017.05.001 . hdl  23181665207 .  Lieto, Antonio Bhatt, Mehul Oltramari, Alessandro Vernon, David May 2018. The role of cognitive architectures in general artificial intelligence. Cognitive Systems Research . 48  13. doi  10.1016j.cogsys.2017.08.003 . hdl  23181665249 .  Search algorithms  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  59189 Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998 , pp.  113163 Luger  Stubblefield 2004 , pp.  79164, 193219 Nilsson 1998 , chpt. 712  Forward chaining , backward chaining , Horn clauses , and logical deduction as search Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  217225, 280294 Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998 , pp.  4652 Luger  Stubblefield 2004 , pp.  6273 Nilsson 1998 , chpt. 4.2, 7.2  State space search and planning  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  382387 Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998 , pp.  298305 Nilsson 1998 , chpt. 10.12  Uninformed searches  breadth first search , depth first search and general state space search  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  5993 Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998 , pp.  113132 Luger  Stubblefield 2004 , pp.  79121 Nilsson 1998 , chpt. 8  Heuristic or informed searches e.g., greedy best first and A  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  94109, Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998 , pp.  pp. 132147, Luger  Stubblefield 2004 , pp.  133150, Nilsson 1998 , chpt. 9, Poole  Mackworth 2017 , Section 3.6  Optimization searches Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  110116,120129 Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998 , pp.  56163 Luger  Stubblefield 2004 , pp.  127133  Genetic programming and genetic algorithms  Luger  Stubblefield 2004 , pp.  509530, Nilsson 1998 , chpt. 4.2, Holland 1975 , Koza 1992 , Poli, Langdon  McPhee 2008 .  Artificial life and society based learning Luger  Stubblefield 2004 , pp.  530541  Daniel Merkle Martin Middendorf 2013. Swarm Intelligence. In Burke, Edmund K. Kendall, Graham eds.. Search Methodologies Introductory Tutorials in Optimization and Decision Support Techniques . Springer Science  Business Media. ISBN   978-1-4614-6940-7 .  Logic  ACM 1998 , I.2.3, Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  194310, Luger  Stubblefield 2004 , pp.  3577, Nilsson 1998 , chpt. 1316  Satplan  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  402407, Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998 , pp.  300301, Nilsson 1998 , chpt. 21  Explanation based learning , relevance based learning, inductive logic programming , case based reasoning  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  678710, Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998 , pp.  414416, Luger  Stubblefield 2004 , pp.  422442, Nilsson 1998 , chpt. 10.3, 17.5  Propositional logic  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  204233, Luger  Stubblefield 2004 , pp.  4550 Nilsson 1998 , chpt. 13  First-order logic and features such as equality  ACM 1998 , I.2.4, Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  240310, Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998 , pp.  268275, Luger  Stubblefield 2004 , pp.  5062, Nilsson 1998 , chpt. 15  Elkin, Charles 1994. The paradoxical success of fuzzy logic. IEEE Expert . 9 4 349. CiteSeerX   10.1.1.100.8402 . doi  10.110964.336150 .  Fuzzy logic  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  526527  What is fuzzy logic Are there computers that are inherently fuzzy and do not apply the usual binary logic . Scientific American . Retrieved 5 May 2018 .  The Belief Calculus and Uncertain Reasoning, Yen-Teh Hsia  a b Domingos 2015 , chapter 6.  Demey, Lorenz Kooi, Barteld Sack, Joshua 7 March 2013. Logic and Probability . Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 5 May 2018 .  Stochastic methods for uncertain reasoning ACM 1998 , I.2.3, Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  462644, Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998 , pp.  345395, Luger  Stubblefield 2004 , pp.  165191, 333381, Nilsson 1998 , chpt. 19  Bayesian networks  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  492523, Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998 , pp.  361381, Luger  Stubblefield 2004 , pp.  182190, 363379, Nilsson 1998 , chpt. 19.34  Bayesian inference algorithm Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  504519, Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998 , pp.  361381, Luger  Stubblefield 2004 , pp.  363379, Nilsson 1998 , chpt. 19.4  7  Domingos 2015 , p.  210.  Bayesian learning and the expectation-maximization algorithm  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  712724, Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998 , pp.  424433, Nilsson 1998 , chpt. 20  Bayesian decision theory and Bayesian decision networks  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  597600  a b c Stochastic temporal models Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  537581 Dynamic Bayesian networks  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  551557 Hidden Markov model   Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  549551 Kalman filters  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  551557  decision theory and decision analysis  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  584597, Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998 , pp.  381394  Markov decision processes and dynamic decision networks  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  613631  Game theory and mechanism design  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  631643  Statistical learning methods and classifiers  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  712754, Luger  Stubblefield 2004 , pp.  453541  Decision tree  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  653664, Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998 , pp.  403408, Luger  Stubblefield 2004 , pp.  408417  Domingos 2015 , p.  88.  a b Neural networks and connectionism Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  736748, Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998 , pp.  408414, Luger  Stubblefield 2004 , pp.  453505, Nilsson 1998 , chpt. 3  Domingos 2015 , p.  187.  K-nearest neighbor algorithm  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  733736  Domingos 2015 , p.  188.  kernel methods such as the support vector machine  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  749752  Gaussian mixture model  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  725727  Domingos 2015 , p.  152.  Naive Bayes classifier  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  718  Classifier performance van der Walt  Bernard 2006  Russell  Norvig 2009 , 18.12 Learning from Examples Summary.  Domingos 2015 , Chapter 4.  Why Deep Learning Is Suddenly Changing Your Life . Fortune . 2016 . Retrieved 12 March 2018 .  Google leads in the race to dominate artificial intelligence . The Economist . 2017 . Retrieved 12 March 2018 .  Feedforward neural networks , perceptrons and radial basis networks  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  739748, 758 Luger  Stubblefield 2004 , pp.  458467  Competitive learning , Hebbian coincidence learning, Hopfield networks and attractor networks Luger  Stubblefield 2004 , pp.  474505  Seppo Linnainmaa 1970. The representation of the cumulative rounding error of an algorithm as a Taylor expansion of the local rounding errors. Masters Thesis in Finnish, Univ. Helsinki, 67.  Griewank, Andreas 2012. Who Invented the Reverse Mode of Differentiation. Optimization Stories, Documenta Matematica, Extra Volume ISMP 2012, 389400.  Paul Werbos , Beyond Regression New Tools for Prediction and Analysis in the Behavioral Sciences, PhD thesis, Harvard University , 1974.  Paul Werbos 1982. Applications of advances in nonlinear sensitivity analysis. In System modeling and optimization pp. 762770. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. Online Archived 14 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine  Backpropagation  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  744748, Luger  Stubblefield 2004 , pp.  467474, Nilsson 1998 , chpt. 3.3  Hierarchical temporal memory  Hawkins  Blakeslee 2005  Artificial intelligence can evolve to solve problems . Science  AAAS . 10 January 2018 . Retrieved 7 February 2018 .  a b c d Schmidhuber, J. 2015. Deep Learning in Neural Networks An Overview. Neural Networks . 61  85117. arXiv  1404.7828 . doi  10.1016j.neunet.2014.09.003 . PMID   25462637 .  a b Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville 2016. Deep Learning. MIT Press. Online Archived 16 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine  Hinton, G. Deng, L. Yu, D. Dahl, G. Mohamed, A. Jaitly, N. Senior, A. Vanhoucke, V. Nguyen, P. Sainath, T. Kingsbury, B. 2012. Deep Neural Networks for Acoustic Modeling in Speech Recognition  The shared views of four research groups. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine . 29 6 8297. doi  10.1109msp.2012.2205597 .  Schmidhuber, Jrgen 2015. Deep Learning. Scholarpedia . 10 11 32832. Bibcode  2015SchpJ..1032832S . doi  10.4249scholarpedia.32832 .  Rina Dechter 1986. Learning while searching in constraint-satisfaction problems. University of California, Computer Science Department, Cognitive Systems Laboratory. Online Archived 19 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine  Igor Aizenberg, Naum N. Aizenberg, Joos P.L. Vandewalle 2000. Multi-Valued and Universal Binary Neurons Theory, Learning and Applications. Springer Science  Business Media.  Ivakhnenko, Alexey 1965. Cybernetic Predicting Devices . Kiev Naukova Dumka.  Ivakhnenko, A. G. 1971. Polynomial Theory of Complex Systems. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics 4 364378. doi  10.1109TSMC.1971.4308320 .  Hinton 2007 .  Research, AI 23 October 2015. Deep Neural Networks for Acoustic Modeling in Speech Recognition . airesearch.com . Retrieved 23 October 2015 .  Fukushima, K. 1980. Neocognitron A self-organizing neural network model for a mechanism of pattern recognition unaffected by shift in position. Biological Cybernetics . 36 4 193202. doi  10.1007bf00344251 . PMID   7370364 .  Yann LeCun 2016. Slides on Deep Learning Online Archived 23 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine  Silver, David  Schrittwieser, Julian Simonyan, Karen Antonoglou, Ioannis Huang, Aja  Guez, Arthur Hubert, Thomas Baker, Lucas Lai, Matthew Bolton, Adrian Chen, Yutian  Lillicrap, Timothy Fan, Hui  Sifre, Laurent Driessche, George van den Graepel, Thore Hassabis, Demis 19 October 2017. Mastering the game of Go without human knowledge PDF . Nature . 550 7676 354359. Bibcode  2017Natur.550..354S . doi  10.1038nature24270 . ISSN   0028-0836 . PMID   29052630 . AlphaGo Lee... 12 convolutional layers  Recurrent neural networks , Hopfield nets  Russell  Norvig 2003 , p.  758 Luger  Stubblefield 2004 , pp.  474505  Hytyniemi, Heikki 1996. Turing machines are recurrent neural networks. Proceedings of STeP 96Publications of the Finnish Artificial Intelligence Society  1324.  P. J. Werbos. Generalization of backpropagation with application to a recurrent gas market model Neural Networks 1, 1988.  A. J. Robinson and F. Fallside. The utility driven dynamic error propagation network. Technical Report CUEDF-INFENGTR.1, Cambridge University Engineering Department, 1987.  R. J. Williams and D. Zipser. Gradient-based learning algorithms for recurrent networks and their computational complexity. In Back-propagation Theory, Architectures and Applications. Hillsdale, NJ Erlbaum, 1994.  Sepp Hochreiter 1991, Untersuchungen zu dynamischen neuronalen Netzen Archived 6 March 2015 at the Wayback Machine , Diploma thesis. Institut f. Informatik, Technische Univ. Munich. Advisor J. Schmidhuber.  Schmidhuber, J. 1992. Learning complex, extended sequences using the principle of history compression. Neural Computation . 4 2 234242. CiteSeerX   10.1.1.49.3934 . doi  10.1162neco.1992.4.2.234 .  Hochreiter, Sepp  and Schmidhuber, Jrgen  Long Short-Term Memory , Neural Computation, 9817351780, 1997  Alex Graves, Santiago Fernandez, Faustino Gomez, and Jrgen Schmidhuber 2006. Connectionist temporal classification Labelling unsegmented sequence data with recurrent neural nets. Proceedings of ICML06, pp. 369376.  Hannun, Awni Case, Carl Casper, Jared Catanzaro, Bryan Diamos, Greg Elsen, Erich Prenger, Ryan Satheesh, Sanjeev Sengupta, Shubho Coates, Adam Ng, Andrew Y. 2014. Deep Speech Scaling up end-to-end speech recognition. arXiv  1412.5567  cs.CL .  Hasim Sak and Andrew Senior and Francoise Beaufays 2014. Long Short-Term Memory recurrent neural network architectures for large scale acoustic modeling. Proceedings of Interspeech 2014.  Li, Xiangang Wu, Xihong 2015. Constructing Long Short-Term Memory based Deep Recurrent Neural Networks for Large Vocabulary Speech Recognition. arXiv  1410.4281  cs.CL .  Haim Sak, Andrew Senior, Kanishka Rao, Franoise Beaufays and Johan Schalkwyk September 2015 Google voice search faster and more accurate. Archived 9 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine  Sutskever, Ilya Vinyals, Oriol Le, Quoc V. 2014. Sequence to Sequence Learning with Neural Networks. arXiv  1409.3215  cs.CL .  Jozefowicz, Rafal Vinyals, Oriol Schuster, Mike Shazeer, Noam Wu, Yonghui 2016. Exploring the Limits of Language Modeling. arXiv  1602.02410  cs.CL .  Gillick, Dan Brunk, Cliff Vinyals, Oriol Subramanya, Amarnag 2015. Multilingual Language Processing From Bytes. arXiv  1512.00103  cs.CL .  Vinyals, Oriol Toshev, Alexander Bengio, Samy Erhan, Dumitru 2015. Show and Tell A Neural Image Caption Generator. arXiv  1411.4555  cs.CV .  Brynjolfsson, Erik Mitchell, Tom 22 December 2017. What can machine learning do Workforce implications . Science . pp.  15301534. Bibcode  2017Sci...358.1530B . doi  10.1126science.aap8062 . Retrieved 7 May 2018 .  Sample, Ian 18 October 2017.   Its able to create knowledge itself Google unveils AI that learns on its own . the Guardian . Retrieved 7 May 2018 .  The AI revolution in science . Science  AAAS . 5 July 2017 . Retrieved 7 May 2018 .  Will your job still exist in 10 years when the robots arrive . South China Morning Post . 2017 . Retrieved 7 May 2018 .  Borowiec, Tracey Lien, Steven 2016. AlphaGo beats human Go champ in milestone for artificial intelligence . latimes.com . Retrieved 7 May 2018 .  Brown, Noam Sandholm, Tuomas 26 January 2018. Superhuman AI for heads-up no-limit poker Libratus beats top professionals . Science . pp.  418424. doi  10.1126science.aao1733 . Retrieved 7 May 2018 .  Ontanon, Santiago Synnaeve, Gabriel Uriarte, Alberto Richoux, Florian Churchill, David Preuss, Mike December 2013. A Survey of Real-Time Strategy Game AI Research and Competition in StarCraft. IEEE Transactions on Computational Intelligence and AI in Games . 5 4 293311. CiteSeerX   10.1.1.406.2524 . doi  10.1109TCIAIG.2013.2286295 .  Facebook Quietly Enters StarCraft War for AI Bots, and Loses . WIRED . 2017 . Retrieved 7 May 2018 .  ILSVRC2017 . image-net.org . Retrieved 6 November 2018 .  Schoenick, Carissa Clark, Peter Tafjord, Oyvind Turney, Peter Etzioni, Oren 23 August 2017. Moving beyond the Turing Test with the Allen AI Science Challenge. Communications of the ACM . 60 9 6064. arXiv  1604.04315 . doi  10.11453122814 .  OBrien  Marakas 2011 .  Mathematical definitions of intelligence Hernandez-Orallo 2000 Dowe  Hajek 1997 Hernandez-Orallo  Dowe 2010  Hernndez-Orallo, Jos Dowe, David L. Hernndez-Lloreda, M.Victoria March 2014. Universal psychometrics Measuring cognitive abilities in the machine kingdom. Cognitive Systems Research . 27  5074. doi  10.1016j.cogsys.2013.06.001 .  a b Russell  Norvig 2009 , p.  1.  CNN 2006 .  Using AI to predict flight delays , Ishti.org.  N. Aletras D. Tsarapatsanis D. Preotiuc-Pietro V. Lampos 2016. Predicting judicial decisions of the European Court of Human Rights a Natural Language Processing perspective. PeerJ Computer Science . 2  e93. doi  10.7717peerj-cs.93 .  The Economist Explains Why firms are piling into artificial intelligence . The Economist . 31 March 2016. Archived from the original on 8 May 2016 . Retrieved 19 May 2016 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Lohr, Steve 28 February 2016. The Promise of Artificial Intelligence Unfolds in Small Steps . The New York Times . Archived from the original on 29 February 2016 . Retrieved 29 February 2016 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Wakefield, Jane 15 June 2016. Social media outstrips TV as news source for young people . BBC News . Archived from the original on 24 June 2016. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Smith, Mark 22 July 2016. So you think you chose to read this article . BBC News . Archived from the original on 25 July 2016. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   10 Promising AI Applications in Health Care . Harvard Business Review . 10 May 2018 . Retrieved 28 August 2018 .  Dina Bass 20 September 2016. Microsoft Develops AI to Help Cancer Doctors Find the Right Treatments . Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 11 May 2017. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Gallagher, James 26 January 2017. Artificial intelligence as good as cancer doctors   . BBC News . Archived from the original on 26 January 2017 . Retrieved 26 January 2017 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Langen, Pauline A. Katz, Jeffrey S. Dempsey, Gayle, eds. 18 October 1994, Remote monitoring of high-risk patients using artificial intelligence , archived from the original on 28 February 2017 , retrieved 27 February 2017 Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Kermany, D Goldbaum, M Zhang, Kang. Identifying Medical Diagnoses and Treatable Diseases by Image-Based Deep Learning PDF . cell.com . Retrieved 18 December 2018 .  Senthilingam, Meera 12 May 2016. Are Autonomous Robots Your next Surgeons . CNN . Cable News Network. Archived from the original on 3 December 2016 . Retrieved 4 December 2016 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Full Page Reload . IEEE Spectrum Technology, Engineering, and Science News . Retrieved 3 September 2019 .  33 Corporations Working On Autonomous Vehicles. CB Insights. N.p., 11 August 2016. 12 November 2016.  West, Darrell M. Moving forward Self-driving vehicles in China, Europe, Japan, Korea, and the United States. Center for Technology Innovation at Brookings. N.p., September 2016. 12 November 2016.  Burgess, Matt 24 August 2017. The UK is about to Start Testing Self-Driving Truck Platoons . Wired UK . Archived from the original on 22 September 2017 . Retrieved 20 September 2017 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Davies, Alex 5 May 2015. Worlds First Self-Driving Semi-Truck Hits the Road . WIRED . Archived from the original on 28 October 2017 . Retrieved 20 September 2017 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   McFarland, Matt. Googles artificial intelligence breakthrough may have a huge impact on self-driving cars and much more. The Washington Post 25 February 2015. Infotrac Newsstand. 24 October 2016  Programming safety into self-driving cars. National Science Foundation. N.p., 2 February 2015. 24 October 2016.  ArXiv, E. T. 26 October 2015. Why Self-Driving Cars Must Be Programmed to Kill. Retrieved 17 November 2017, from httpswww.technologyreview.coms542626why-self-driving-cars-must-be-programmed-to-kill  ONeill, Eleanor 31 July 2016. Accounting, automation and AI . icas.com . Archived from the original on 18 November 2016 . Retrieved 18 November 2016 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Robots Beat Humans in Trading Battle. Archived 9 September 2009 at the Wayback Machine BBC.com 8 August 2001  CTO Corner Artificial Intelligence Use in Financial Services  Financial Services Roundtable . Financial Services Roundtable . 2 April 2015. Archived from the original on 18 November 2016 . Retrieved 18 November 2016 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   SAS AI for banking  Chapman, Lizette. Palantir once mocked the idea of salespeople. Now its hiring them . latimes.com . Retrieved 28 February 2019 .  In 30 years, the best CEO could be a robot  Cant find a perfect CEO Create an AI one yourself  The Robots Are Coming To Corporate Finance  Marwala, Tshilidzi Hurwitz, Evan 2017. Artificial Intelligence and Economic Theory Skynet in the Market . London Springer . ISBN   978-3-319-66104-9 .  Buckley, Chris Mozur, Paul 22 May 2019. How China Uses High-Tech Surveillance to Subdue Minorities . The New York Times .  Security lapse exposed a Chinese smart city surveillance system .  Why AI researchers like video games . The Economist . Archived from the original on 5 October 2017. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Yannakakis, G. N. 2012, May. Game AI revisited. In Proceedings of the 9th conference on Computing Frontiers pp. 285292. ACM.  a b Slyusar, Vadym 2019. Artificial intelligence as the basis of future control networks . Preprint .  Getting to grips with military robotics . The Economist . 25 January 2018 . Retrieved 7 February 2018 .  Autonomous Systems Infographic . siemens.com . Retrieved 7 February 2018 .  Allen, Gregory 6 February 2019. Understanding Chinas AI Strategy . www.cnas.orgpublicationsreportsunderstanding-chinas-ai-strategy . Center for a New American Security. Archived from the original on 17 March 2019 . Retrieved 17 March 2019 .  Metz, Cade 15 March 2018. Pentagon Wants Silicon Valleys Help on A.I. The New York Times . Retrieved 19 March 2018 .  Chang, Hsihui Kao, Yi-Ching Mashruwala, Raj Sorensen, Susan M. 10 April 2017. Technical Inefficiency, Allocative Inefficiency, and Audit Pricing. Journal of Accounting, Auditing  Finance . 33 4 580600. doi  10.11770148558X17696760 .  Matz, S. C., et al. Psychological targeting as an effective approach to digital mass persuasion. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2017 201710966.  Busby, Mattha 30 April 2018. Revealed how bookies use AI to keep gamblers hooked . the Guardian .  Celli, Fabio, Pietro Zani Massani, and Bruno Lepri. Profilio Psychometric Profiling to Boost Social Media Advertising. Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on Multimedia Conference. ACM, 2017 1  Thinking Machines Art and Design in the Computer Age, 19591989 . The Museum of Modern Art . Retrieved 23 July 2019 .  httpswww.washingtonpost.comnewsinnovationswp20160310googles-psychedelic-paint-brush-raises-the-oldest-question-in-art Retrieved July 29  Unhuman Art in the Age of AI  State Festival . Statefestival.org . Retrieved 13 September 2018 .  Chun, Rene 21 September 2017. Its Getting Hard to Tell If a Painting Was Made by a Computer or a Human . Artsy . Retrieved 23 July 2019 .  httpsdl.acm.orgcitation.cfmid3204480.3186697 Retrieved July 29  The Turing test  Turings original publication Turing 1950 Historical influence and philosophical implications Haugeland 1985 , pp.  69 Crevier 1993 , p.  24 McCorduck 2004 , pp.  7071 Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  23 and 948  Dartmouth proposal McCarthy et al. 1955 the original proposal Crevier 1993 , p.  49 historical significance  The physical symbol systems hypothesis Newell  Simon 1976 , p.  116 McCorduck 2004 , p.  153 Russell  Norvig 2003 , p.  18  Dreyfus criticized the necessary condition of the physical symbol system hypothesis, which he called the psychological assumption The mind can be viewed as a device operating on bits of information according to formal rules.  Dreyfus 1992 , p.  156  Dreyfus critique of artificial intelligence  Dreyfus 1972 , Dreyfus  Dreyfus 1986 Crevier 1993 , pp.  120132 McCorduck 2004 , pp.  211239 Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  950952,  Gdel 1951  in this lecture, Kurt Gdel uses the incompleteness theorem to arrive at the following disjunction a the human mind is not a consistent finite machine, or b there exist Diophantine equations for which it cannot decide whether solutions exist. Gdel finds b implausible, and thus seems to have believed the human mind was not equivalent to a finite machine, i.e., its power exceeded that of any finite machine. He recognized that this was only a conjecture, since one could never disprove b. Yet he considered the disjunctive conclusion to be a certain fact.  The Mathematical Objection Russell  Norvig 2003 , p.  949 McCorduck 2004 , pp.  448449 Making the Mathematical Objection Lucas 1961 Penrose 1989 Refuting Mathematical Objection Turing 1950 under 2 The Mathematical Objection Hofstadter 1979 Background Gdel 1931, Church 1936, Kleene 1935, Turing 1937  Graham Oppy 20 January 2015. Gdels Incompleteness Theorems . Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 27 April 2016 . These Gdelian anti-mechanist arguments are, however, problematic, and there is wide consensus that they fail.  Stuart J. Russell  Peter Norvig 2010. 26.1.2 Philosophical FoundationsWeak AI Can Machines Act IntelligentlyThe mathematical objection. Artificial Intelligence A Modern Approach 3rd ed.. Upper Saddle River, NJ Prentice Hall . ISBN   978-0-13-604259-4 . even if we grant that computers have limitations on what they can prove, there is no evidence that humans are immune from those limitations.  Mark Colyvan. An introduction to the philosophy of mathematics. Cambridge University Press , 2012. From 2.2.2, Philosophical significance of Gdels incompleteness results The accepted wisdom with which I concur is that the Lucas-Penrose arguments fail.  Russel, Stuart., Daniel Dewey, and Max Tegmark. Research Priorities for Robust and Beneficial Artificial Intelligence. AI Magazine 364 2015. 8 December 2016.  Simon, Matt 1 April 2019. Andrew Yangs Presidential Bid Is So Very 21st Century . Wired  via www.wired.com.  Rawlinson, Kevin 29 January 2015. Microsofts Bill Gates insists AI is a threat . BBC News . Archived from the original on 29 January 2015 . Retrieved 30 January 2015 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Holley, Peter 28 January 2015. Bill Gates on dangers of artificial intelligence I dont understand why some people are not concerned   . The Washington Post . ISSN   0190-8286 . Archived from the original on 30 October 2015 . Retrieved 30 October 2015 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Gibbs, Samuel 27 October 2014. Elon Musk artificial intelligence is our biggest existential threat . The Guardian . Archived from the original on 30 October 2015 . Retrieved 30 October 2015 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Cellan-Jones, Rory 2 December 2014. Stephen Hawking warns artificial intelligence could end mankind . BBC News . Archived from the original on 30 October 2015 . Retrieved 30 October 2015 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Post, Washington. Tech titans like Elon Musk are spending 1 billion to save you from terminators . Archived from the original on 7 June 2016. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Mller, Vincent C. Bostrom, Nick 2014. Future Progress in Artificial Intelligence A Poll Among Experts PDF . AI Matters . 1 1 911. doi  10.11452639475.2639478 . Archived PDF from the original on 15 January 2016. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Oracle CEO Mark Hurd sees no reason to fear ERP AI . SearchERP . Retrieved 6 May 2019 .  Mark Zuckerberg responds to Elon Musks paranoia about AI AI is going to... help keep our communities safe.   . Business Insider . 25 May 2018 . Retrieved 6 May 2019 .  The mysterious artificial intelligence company Elon Musk invested in is developing game-changing smart computers . Tech Insider . Archived from the original on 30 October 2015 . Retrieved 30 October 2015 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Clark, Jack. Musk-Backed Group Probes Risks Behind Artificial Intelligence . Bloomberg.com . Archived from the original on 30 October 2015 . Retrieved 30 October 2015 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Elon Musk Is Donating 10M Of His Own Money To Artificial Intelligence Research . Fast Company . 15 January 2015. Archived from the original on 30 October 2015 . Retrieved 30 October 2015 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Is artificial intelligence really an existential threat to humanity . Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists . 9 August 2015. Archived from the original on 30 October 2015 . Retrieved 30 October 2015 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   The case against killer robots, from a guy actually working on artificial intelligence . Fusion.net . Archived from the original on 4 February 2016 . Retrieved 31 January 2016 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Will artificial intelligence destroy humanity Here are 5 reasons not to worry . Vox . 22 August 2014. Archived from the original on 30 October 2015 . Retrieved 30 October 2015 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   In the early 1970s, Kenneth Colby presented a version of Weizenbaums ELIZA known as DOCTOR which he promoted as a serious therapeutic tool.  Crevier 1993 , pp.  132144  Joseph Weizenbaum s critique of AI Weizenbaum 1976 Crevier 1993 , pp.  132144 McCorduck 2004 , pp.  356373 Russell  Norvig 2003 , p.  961 Weizenbaum the AI researcher who developed the first chatterbot program, ELIZA  argued in 1976 that the misuse of artificial intelligence has the potential to devalue human life.  Commentary Bad news. Artificial intelligence is biased . CNA .  a b c Jeff Larson, Julia Angwin 23 May 2016. How We Analyzed the COMPAS Recidivism Algorithm . ProPublica . Retrieved 23 July 2019 .  E McGaughey, Will Robots Automate Your Job Away Full Employment, Basic Income, and Economic Democracy 2018 SSRN, part 23  Automation and anxiety . The Economist . 9 May 2015 . Retrieved 13 January 2018 .  Lohr, Steve 2017. Robots Will Take Jobs, but Not as Fast as Some Fear, New Report Says . The New York Times . Retrieved 13 January 2018 .  Frey, Carl Benedikt Osborne, Michael A 1 January 2017. The future of employment How susceptible are jobs to computerisation. Technological Forecasting and Social Change . 114  254280. CiteSeerX   10.1.1.395.416 . doi  10.1016j.techfore.2016.08.019 . ISSN   0040-1625 .  Arntz, Melanie, Terry Gregory, and Ulrich Zierahn. The risk of automation for jobs in OECD countries A comparative analysis. OECD Social, Employment, and Migration Working Papers 189 2016. p. 33.  Mahdawi, Arwa 26 June 2017. What jobs will still be around in 20 years Read this to prepare your future . The Guardian . Retrieved 13 January 2018 .  Stephen Hawking, Elon Musk, and Bill Gates Warn About Artificial Intelligence . Observer . 19 August 2015. Archived from the original on 30 October 2015 . Retrieved 30 October 2015 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Wendell Wallach 2010. Moral Machines , Oxford University Press.  Wallach, pp 3754.  Wallach, pp 5573.  Wallach, Introduction chapter.  a b Michael Anderson and Susan Leigh Anderson 2011, Machine Ethics, Cambridge University Press.  a b Machine Ethics . aaai.org . Archived from the original on 29 November 2014. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Rubin, Charles Spring 2003. Artificial Intelligence and Human Nature The New Atlantis . 1  88100. Archived from the original on 11 June 2012. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  Cite journal requires journal  help   Brooks, Rodney 10 November 2014. artificial intelligence is a tool, not a threat . Archived from the original on 12 November 2014. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Chalmers, David 1995. Facing up to the problem of consciousness . Journal of Consciousness Studies . 2 3 200219. See also this link  Horst, Steven , 2005 The Computational Theory of Mind in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy  This version is from Searle 1999 , and is also quoted in Dennett 1991 , p.  435. Searles original formulation was The appropriately programmed computer really is a mind, in the sense that computers given the right programs can be literally said to understand and have other cognitive states.  Searle 1980 , p.  1. Strong AI is defined similarly by Russell  Norvig 2003 , p.  947 The assertion that machines could possibly act intelligently or, perhaps better, act as if they were intelligent is called the weak AI hypothesis by philosophers, and the assertion that machines that do so are actually thinking as opposed to simulating thinking is called the strong AI hypothesis.  Searles Chinese room argument Searle 1980 . Searles original presentation of the thought experiment. Searle 1999 . Discussion Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  958960 McCorduck 2004 , pp.  443445 Crevier 1993 , pp.  269271  Robot rights  Russell  Norvig 2003 , p.  964 BBC News 2006 Prematurity of Henderson 2007 In fiction McCorduck 2004 , pp.  19025 discusses Frankenstein and identifies the key ethical issues as scientific hubris and the suffering of the monster, i.e. robot rights .  Evans, Woody 2015. Posthuman Rights Dimensions of Transhuman Worlds. Teknokultura . 12 2. doi  10.5209rev_TK.2015.v12.n2.49072 .  maschafilm. Content Plug  Pray Film  Artificial Intelligence  Robots - . plugandpray-film.de . Archived from the original on 12 February 2016. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Omohundro, Steve 2008. The Nature of Self-Improving Artificial Intelligence . presented and distributed at the 2007 Singularity Summit, San Francisco, CA.  a b c Technological singularity  Vinge 1993 Kurzweil 2005 Russell  Norvig 2003 , p.  963  Transhumanism  Moravec 1988 Kurzweil 2005 Russell  Norvig 2003 , p.  963  AI as evolution Edward Fredkin is quoted in McCorduck 2004 , p.  401. Butler 1863 Dyson 1998  Robots and Artificial Intelligence . www.igmchicago.org . Retrieved 3 July 2019 .  Buttazzo, G. July 2001. Artificial consciousness Utopia or real possibility. Computer . 34 7 2430. doi  10.11092.933500 .  Anderson, Susan Leigh. Asimovs three laws of robotics and machine metaethics. AI  Society 22.4 2008 477493.  McCauley, Lee 2007. AI armageddon and the three laws of robotics. Ethics and Information Technology . 9 2 153164. CiteSeerX   10.1.1.85.8904 . doi  10.1007s10676-007-9138-2 .  Galvan, Jill 1 January 1997. Entering the Posthuman Collective in Philip K. Dicks Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep  . Science Fiction Studies . 24 3 413429. JSTOR   4240644 . AI textbooks  edit  .mw-parser-output .refbeginfont-size90margin-bottom0.5em.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indentsullist-style-typenonemargin-left0.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indentsulli,.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indentsdlddmargin-left0padding-left3.2emtext-indent-3.2emlist-stylenone.mw-parser-output .refbegin-100font-size100 Hutter, Marcus 2005. Universal Artificial Intelligence . Berlin Springer. ISBN   978-3-540-22139-5 . Jackson, Philip 1985. Introduction to Artificial Intelligence 2nd ed.. Dover. ISBN   978-0-486-24864-6 . Luger, George  Stubblefield, William 2004. Artificial Intelligence Structures and Strategies for Complex Problem Solving 5th ed.. BenjaminCummings. ISBN   978-0-8053-4780-7 . Neapolitan, Richard  Jiang, Xia 2018. Artificial Intelligence With an Introduction to Machine Learning . Chapman  HallCRC. ISBN   978-1-138-50238-3 . Nilsson, Nils 1998. Artificial Intelligence A New Synthesis . Morgan Kaufmann. ISBN   978-1-55860-467-4 . Russell, Stuart J.  Norvig, Peter 2003, Artificial Intelligence A Modern Approach 2nd ed., Upper Saddle River, New Jersey Prentice Hall, ISBN   0-13-790395-2 . Russell, Stuart J.  Norvig, Peter 2009. Artificial Intelligence A Modern Approach 3rd ed.. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey Prentice Hall. ISBN   978-0-13-604259-4 . . Poole, David  Mackworth, Alan  Goebel, Randy 1998. Computational Intelligence A Logical Approach . New York Oxford University Press. ISBN   978-0-19-510270-3 . Winston, Patrick Henry 1984. Artificial Intelligence . Reading, MA Addison-Wesley. ISBN   978-0-201-08259-3 . Rich, Elaine 1983. Artificial Intelligence . McGraw-Hill. ISBN   978-0-07-052261-9 . Bundy, Alan 1980. Artificial Intelligence An Introductory Course 2nd ed.. Edinburgh University Press. ISBN   978-0-85224-410-4 . Poole, David  Mackworth, Alan 2017. Artificial Intelligence Foundations of Computational Agents 2nd ed.. Cambridge University Press. ISBN   978-1-107-19539-4 . History of AI  edit  Crevier, Daniel 1993, AI The Tumultuous Search for Artificial Intelligence , New York, NY BasicBooks, ISBN   0-465-02997-3 . McCorduck, Pamela 2004, Machines Who Think 2nd ed., Natick, MA A. K. Peters, Ltd., ISBN   1-56881-205-1 . Newquist, HP 1994. The Brain Makers Genius, Ego, And Greed In The Quest For Machines That Think . New York MacmillanSAMS. ISBN   978-0-672-30412-5 . Nilsson, Nils 2009. The Quest for Artificial Intelligence A History of Ideas and Achievements . New York Cambridge University Press. ISBN   978-0-521-12293-1 . Other sources  edit  Asada, M. Hosoda, K. Kuniyoshi, Y. Ishiguro, H. Inui, T. Yoshikawa, Y. Ogino, M. Yoshida, C. 2009. Cognitive developmental robotics a survey. IEEE Transactions on Autonomous Mental Development . 1 1 1234. doi  10.1109tamd.2009.2021702 . ACM Computing Classification System Artificial intelligence . ACM . 1998. Archived from the original on 12 October 2007 . Retrieved 30 August 2007 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  Goodman, Joanna 2016. Robots in Law How Artificial Intelligence is Transforming Legal Services 1st ed.. Ark Group. ISBN   978-1-78358-264-8 . Albus, J. S. 2002. 4DRCS A reference model architecture for intelligent unmanned ground vehicles. In Gerhart, G. Gunderson, R. Shoemaker, C. eds.. 4-DRCS A Reference Model Architecture for Intelligent Unmanned Ground Vehicles PDF . Proceedings of the SPIE AeroSense Session on Unmanned Ground Vehicle Technology . Unmanned Ground Vehicle Technology IV. 3693 . pp.  1120. Bibcode  2002SPIE.4715..303A . CiteSeerX   10.1.1.15.14 . doi  10.111712.474462 . Archived from the original PDF on 25 July 2004. Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help  Aleksander, Igor 1995. Artificial Neuroconsciousness An Update . IWANN. Archived from the original on 2 March 1997. BibTex Archived 2 March 1997 at the Wayback Machine . Bach, Joscha 2008. Seven Principles of Synthetic Intelligence . In Wang, Pei Goertzel, Ben Franklin, Stan eds.. Artificial General Intelligence, 2008 Proceedings of the First AGI Conference . IOS Press. pp.  6374. ISBN   978-1-58603-833-5 . Robots could demand legal rights . BBC News . 21 December 2006 . Retrieved 3 February 2011 . Brooks, Rodney 1990. Elephants Dont Play Chess PDF . Robotics and Autonomous Systems . 6 12 315. CiteSeerX   10.1.1.588.7539 . doi  10.1016S0921-88900580025-9 . Archived PDF from the original on 9 August 2007. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  Brooks, R. A. 1991. How to build complete creatures rather than isolated cognitive simulators. In VanLehn, K. ed.. Architectures for Intelligence . Hillsdale, NJ Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. pp.  225239. CiteSeerX   10.1.1.52.9510 . Buchanan, Bruce G. 2005. A Very Brief History of Artificial Intelligence PDF . AI Magazine  5360. Archived from the original PDF on 26 September 2007. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  Butler, Samuel 13 June 1863. Darwin among the Machines . Letters to the Editor. The Press . Christchurch, New Zealand . Retrieved 16 October 2014  via Victoria University of Wellington. Clark, Jack 8 December 2015. Why 2015 Was a Breakthrough Year in Artificial Intelligence . Bloomberg News . Archived from the original on 23 November 2016 . Retrieved 23 November 2016 . After a half-decade of quiet breakthroughs in artificial intelligence, 2015 has been a landmark year. Computers are smarter and learning faster than ever. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  AI set to exceed human brain power . CNN . 26 July 2006. Archived from the original on 19 February 2008. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  Dennett, Daniel 1991. Consciousness Explained . The Penguin Press. ISBN   978-0-7139-9037-9 . Domingos, Pedro 2015. The Master Algorithm How the Quest for the Ultimate Learning Machine Will Remake Our World . Basic Books. ISBN   978-0-465-06192-1 . Dowe, D. L. Hajek, A. R. 1997. A computational extension to the Turing Test . Proceedings of the 4th Conference of the Australasian Cognitive Science Society . Archived from the original on 28 June 2011. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  Dreyfus, Hubert 1972. What Computers Cant Do . New York MIT Press. ISBN   978-0-06-011082-6 . Dreyfus, Hubert  Dreyfus, Stuart 1986. Mind over Machine The Power of Human Intuition and Expertise in the Era of the Computer . Oxford, UK Blackwell. ISBN   978-0-02-908060-3 . Dreyfus, Hubert 1992. What Computers Still Cant Do . New York MIT Press. ISBN   978-0-262-54067-4 . Dyson, George 1998. Darwin among the Machines . Allan Lane Science. ISBN   978-0-7382-0030-9 . Edelman, Gerald 23 November 2007. Gerald Edelman  Neural Darwinism and Brain-based Devices . Talking Robots. Archived from the original on 8 October 2009. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  Edelson, Edward 1991. The Nervous System . New York Chelsea House. ISBN   978-0-7910-0464-7 . Fearn, Nicholas 2007. The Latest Answers to the Oldest Questions A Philosophical Adventure with the Worlds Greatest Thinkers . New York Grove Press. ISBN   978-0-8021-1839-4 . Gladwell, Malcolm 2005. Blink . New York Little, Brown and Co. ISBN   978-0-316-17232-5 . Gdel, Kurt 1951. Some basic theorems on the foundations of mathematics and their implications . Gibbs Lecture. In Feferman, Solomon , ed. 1995. Kurt Gdel Collected Works, Vol. III Unpublished Essays and Lectures . Oxford University Press. pp.  30423. ISBN   978-0-19-514722-3 . Haugeland, John 1985. Artificial Intelligence The Very Idea . Cambridge, Mass. MIT Press. ISBN   978-0-262-08153-5 . Hawkins, Jeff  Blakeslee, Sandra 2005. On Intelligence . New York, NY Owl Books. ISBN   978-0-8050-7853-4 . Henderson, Mark 24 April 2007. Human rights for robots Were getting carried away . The Times Online . London. Hernandez-Orallo, Jose 2000. Beyond the Turing Test. Journal of Logic, Language and Information . 9 4 447466. doi  10.1023A1008367325700 . Hernandez-Orallo, J. Dowe, D. L. 2010. Measuring Universal Intelligence Towards an Anytime Intelligence Test. Artificial Intelligence . 174 18 15081539. CiteSeerX   10.1.1.295.9079 . doi  10.1016j.artint.2010.09.006 . Hinton, G. E. 2007. Learning multiple layers of representation. Trends in Cognitive Sciences . 11 10 428434. doi  10.1016j.tics.2007.09.004 . PMID   17921042 . Hofstadter, Douglas 1979. Gdel, Escher, Bach an Eternal Golden Braid . New York, NY Vintage Books. ISBN   978-0-394-74502-2 . Holland, John H. 1975. Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems . University of Michigan Press. ISBN   978-0-262-58111-0 . Howe, J. November 1994. Artificial Intelligence at Edinburgh University a Perspective . Retrieved 30 August 2007 . Hutter, M. 2012. One Decade of Universal Artificial Intelligence. Theoretical Foundations of Artificial General Intelligence . Atlantis Thinking Machines. 4 . pp.  6788. CiteSeerX   10.1.1.228.8725 . doi  10.2991978-94-91216-62-6_5 . ISBN   978-94-91216-61-9 . Kahneman, Daniel  Slovic, D. Tversky, Amos 1982. Judgment under uncertainty Heuristics and biases . New York Cambridge University Press. ISBN   978-0-521-28414-1 . Kaplan, Andreas Haenlein, Michael 2018. Siri, Siri in my Hand, whos the Fairest in the Land On the Interpretations, Illustrations and Implications of Artificial Intelligence. Business Horizons . 62  1525. doi  10.1016j.bushor.2018.08.004 . Katz, Yarden 1 November 2012. Noam Chomsky on Where Artificial Intelligence Went Wrong . The Atlantic . Retrieved 26 October 2014 . Kismet . MIT Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Humanoid Robotics Group . Retrieved 25 October 2014 . Koza, John R. 1992. Genetic Programming On the Programming of Computers by Means of Natural Selection . MIT Press. Bibcode  1992gppc.book.....K . ISBN   978-0-262-11170-6 . Kolata, G. 1982. How can computers get common sense. Science . 217 4566 12371238. Bibcode  1982Sci...217.1237K . doi  10.1126science.217.4566.1237 . PMID   17837639 . Kumar, Gulshan Kumar, Krishan 2012. The Use of Artificial-Intelligence-Based Ensembles for Intrusion Detection A Review. Applied Computational Intelligence and Soft Computing . 2012  120. doi  10.11552012850160 . Kurzweil, Ray 1999. The Age of Spiritual Machines . Penguin Books. ISBN   978-0-670-88217-5 . Kurzweil, Ray 2005. The Singularity is Near . Penguin Books. ISBN   978-0-670-03384-3 . Lakoff, George  Nez, Rafael E. 2000. Where Mathematics Comes From How the Embodied Mind Brings Mathematics into Being . Basic Books. ISBN   978-0-465-03771-1 . Langley, Pat 2011. The changing science of machine learning. Machine Learning . 82 3 275279. doi  10.1007s10994-011-5242-y . Law, Diane June 1994. Searle, Subsymbolic Functionalism and Synthetic Intelligence Technical report. University of Texas at Austin. p.  AI94-222. CiteSeerX   10.1.1.38.8384 . Legg, Shane Hutter, Marcus 15 June 2007. A Collection of Definitions of Intelligence Technical report. IDSIA . arXiv  0706.3639 . Bibcode  2007arXiv0706.3639L . 07-07. Lenat, Douglas  Guha, R. V. 1989. Building Large Knowledge-Based Systems . Addison-Wesley. ISBN   978-0-201-51752-1 . Lighthill, James 1973. Artificial Intelligence A General Survey. Artificial Intelligence a paper symposium . Science Research Council. Lucas, John 1961. Minds, Machines and Gdel. In Anderson, A.R. ed.. Minds and Machines . Archived from the original on 19 August 2007 . Retrieved 30 August 2007 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  Lungarella, M. Metta, G. Pfeifer, R. Sandini, G. 2003. Developmental robotics a survey. Connection Science . 15 4 151190. CiteSeerX   10.1.1.83.7615 . doi  10.108009540090310001655110 . Maker, Meg Houston 2006. AI50 AI Past, Present, Future . Dartmouth College. Archived from the original on 3 January 2007 . Retrieved 16 October 2008 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help  Markoff, John 16 February 2011. Computer Wins on Jeopardy Trivial, Its Not . The New York Times . Retrieved 25 October 2014 . McCarthy, John  Minsky, Marvin  Rochester, Nathan  Shannon, Claude 1955. A Proposal for the Dartmouth Summer Research Project on Artificial Intelligence . Archived from the original on 26 August 2007 . Retrieved 30 August 2007 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  . McCarthy, John  Hayes, P. J. 1969. Some philosophical problems from the standpoint of artificial intelligence . Machine Intelligence . 4  463502. CiteSeerX   10.1.1.85.5082 . Archived from the original on 10 August 2007 . Retrieved 30 August 2007 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  McCarthy, John 12 November 2007. What Is Artificial Intelligence . Archived from the original on 18 November 2015. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  Minsky, Marvin 1967. Computation Finite and Infinite Machines . Englewood Cliffs, N.J. Prentice-Hall. ISBN   978-0-13-165449-5 . Minsky, Marvin 2006. The Emotion Machine . New York, NY Simon  Schusterl. ISBN   978-0-7432-7663-4 . Moravec, Hans 1988. Mind Children . Harvard University Press. ISBN   978-0-674-57616-2 . Norvig, Peter 25 June 2012. On Chomsky and the Two Cultures of Statistical Learning . Peter Norvig. Archived from the original on 19 October 2014. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  NRC United States National Research Council 1999. Developments in Artificial Intelligence. Funding a Revolution Government Support for Computing Research . National Academy Press. Needham, Joseph 1986. Science and Civilization in China Volume 2 . Caves Books Ltd. Newell, Allen  Simon, H. A. 1976. Computer Science as Empirical Inquiry Symbols and Search . Communications of the ACM . 19 3 113126. doi  10.1145360018.360022 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2008. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  . Nilsson, Nils 1983. Artificial Intelligence Prepares for 2001 PDF . AI Magazine . 1 1. Presidential Address to the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence . OBrien, James Marakas, George 2011. Management Information Systems 10th ed.. McGraw-HillIrwin. ISBN   978-0-07-337681-3 . OConnor, Kathleen Malone 1994. The alchemical creation of life takwin and other concepts of Genesis in medieval Islam . University of Pennsylvania 1435. Cite journal requires journal  help  Oudeyer, P-Y. 2010. On the impact of robotics in behavioral and cognitive sciences from insect navigation to human cognitive development PDF . IEEE Transactions on Autonomous Mental Development . 2 1 216. doi  10.1109tamd.2009.2039057 . Penrose, Roger 1989. The Emperors New Mind Concerning Computer, Minds and The Laws of Physics . Oxford University Press . ISBN   978-0-19-851973-7 . Poli, R. Langdon, W. B. McPhee, N. F. 2008. A Field Guide to Genetic Programming . Lulu.com. ISBN   978-1-4092-0073-4  via gp-field-guide.org.uk. Rajani, Sandeep 2011. Artificial Intelligence  Man or Machine PDF . International Journal of Information Technology and Knowledge Management . 4 1 173176. Archived from the original PDF on 18 January 2013. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  Ronald, E. M. A. and Sipper, M. Intelligence is not enough On the socialization of talking machines, Minds and Machines , vol. 11, no. 4, pp.  567576, November 2001. Ronald, E. M. A. and Sipper, M. What use is a Turing chatterbox , Communications of the ACM, vol. 43, no. 10, pp.  2123, October 2000. Searle, John 1980. Minds, Brains and Programs PDF . Behavioral and Brain Sciences . 3 3 417457. doi  10.1017S0140525X00005756 . Searle, John 1999. Mind, language and society . New York, NY Basic Books. ISBN   978-0-465-04521-1 . OCLC   231867665 . Shapiro, Stuart C. 1992. Artificial Intelligence. In Shapiro, Stuart C. ed.. Encyclopedia of Artificial Intelligence PDF 2nd ed.. New York John Wiley. pp.  5457. ISBN   978-0-471-50306-4 . Simon, H. A. 1965. The Shape of Automation for Men and Management . New York Harper  Row. Skillings, Jonathan 3 July 2006. Getting Machines to Think Like Us . cnet . Retrieved 3 February 2011 . Solomonoff, Ray 1956. An Inductive Inference Machine PDF . Dartmouth Summer Research Conference on Artificial Intelligence  via std.com, pdf scanned copy of the original. Later published as Solomonoff, Ray 1957. An Inductive Inference Machine. IRE Convention Record . Section on Information Theory, part 2. pp.  5662. Tao, Jianhua Tan, Tieniu 2005. Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction . Affective Computing A Review. LNCS 3784. Springer. pp.  981995. doi  10.100711573548 . Tecuci, Gheorghe MarchApril 2012. Artificial Intelligence. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews Computational Statistics . 4 2 168180. doi  10.1002wics.200 . Thro, Ellen 1993. Robotics The Marriage of Computers and Machines . New York Facts on File. ISBN   978-0-8160-2628-9 . Turing, Alan October 1950, Computing Machinery and Intelligence, Mind , LIX 236 433460, doi  10.1093mindLIX.236.433 , ISSN   0026-4423 . van der Walt, Christiaan Bernard, Etienne 2006. Data characteristics that determine classifier performance PDF . Archived from the original PDF on 25 March 2009 . Retrieved 5 August 2009 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  Vinge, Vernor 1993. The Coming Technological Singularity How to Survive in the Post-Human Era . Vision 21 Interdisciplinary Science and Engineering in the Era of Cyberspace  11. Bibcode  1993vise.nasa...11V . Wason, P. C.  Shapiro, D. 1966. Reasoning. In Foss, B. M. ed.. New horizons in psychology . Harmondsworth Penguin. Weizenbaum, Joseph 1976. Computer Power and Human Reason . San Francisco W.H. Freeman  Company. ISBN   978-0-7167-0464-5 . Weng, J. McClelland Pentland, A. Sporns, O. Stockman, I. Sur, M. Thelen, E. 2001. Autonomous mental development by robots and animals PDF . Science . 291 5504 599600. doi  10.1126science.291.5504.599 . PMID   11229402  via msu.edu. Applications of AI . www-formal.stanford.edu . Retrieved 25 September 2016 . Further reading  edit  DH Author, Why Are There Still So Many Jobs The History and Future of Workplace Automation 2015 293 Journal of Economic Perspectives 3. Boden, Margaret , Mind As Machine , Oxford University Press , 2006. Cukier, Kenneth , Ready for Robots How to Think about the Future of AI, Foreign Affairs , vol. 98, no. 4 JulyAugust 2019, pp.  19298. George Dyson , historian of computing, writes in what might be called Dysons Law that Any system simple enough to be understandable will not be complicated enough to behave intelligently, while any system complicated enough to behave intelligently will be too complicated to understand. p.  197. Computer scientist Alex Pentland writes Current AI machine-learning algorithms are, at their core, dead simple stupid. They work, but they work by brute force. p.  198. Domingos, Pedro , Our Digital Doubles AI will serve our species, not control it, Scientific American , vol. 319, no. 3 September 2018, pp.  8893. Gopnik, Alison , Making AI More Human Artificial intelligence has staged a revival by starting to incorporate what we know about how children learn, Scientific American , vol. 316, no. 6 June 2017, pp.  6065. Johnston, John 2008 The Allure of Machinic Life Cybernetics, Artificial Life, and the New AI , MIT Press Marcus, Gary , Am I Human Researchers need new ways to distinguish artificial intelligence from the natural kind, Scientific American , vol. 316, no. 3 March 2017, pp.  5863. A stumbling block to AI has been an incapacity for reliable disambiguation . An example is the pronoun disambiguation problem a machine has no way of determining to whom or what a pronoun in a sentence refers. p.  61. E McGaughey, Will Robots Automate Your Job Away Full Employment, Basic Income, and Economic Democracy 2018 SSRN, part 23 . George Musser ,  Artificial Imagination  How machines could learn creativity and common sense , among other human qualities, Scientific American , vol. 320, no. 5 May 2019, pp.  5863. Myers, Courtney Boyd ed. 2009. The AI Report . Forbes June 2009 Raphael, Bertram 1976. The Thinking Computer . W.H.Freeman and Company. ISBN   978-0-7167-0723-3 . Scharre, Paul, Killer Apps The Real Dangers of an AI Arms Race, Foreign Affairs , vol. 98, no. 3 MayJune 2019, pp.  13544. Todays AI technologies are powerful but unreliable. Rules-based systems cannot deal with circumstances their programmers did not anticipate. Learning systems are limited by the data on which they were trained. AI failures have already led to tragedy. Advanced autopilot features in cars, although they perform well in some circumstances, have driven cars without warning into trucks, concrete barriers, and parked cars. In the wrong situation, AI systems go from supersmart to superdumb in an instant. When an enemy is trying to manipulate and hack an AI system, the risks are even greater. p.  140. Serenko, Alexander 2010. The development of an AI journal ranking based on the revealed preference approach PDF . Journal of Informetrics . 4 4 447459. doi  10.1016j.joi.2010.04.001 . Serenko, Alexander Michael Dohan 2011. Comparing the expert survey and citation impact journal ranking methods Example from the field of Artificial Intelligence PDF . Journal of Informetrics . 5 4 629649. doi  10.1016j.joi.2011.06.002 . Sun, R.  Bookman, L. eds., Computational Architectures Integrating Neural and Symbolic Processes . Kluwer Academic Publishers, Needham, MA. 1994. Tom Simonite 29 December 2014. 2014 in Computing Breakthroughs in Artificial Intelligence . MIT Technology Review . Tooze, Adam , Democracy and Its Discontents, The New York Review of Books , vol. LXVI, no. 10 6 June 2019, pp.  5253, 5657. Democracy has no clear answer for the mindless operation of bureaucratic and technological power . We may indeed be witnessing its extension in the form of artificial intelligence and robotics . Likewise, after decades of dire warning, the environmental problem remains fundamentally unaddressed.... Bureaucratic overreach and environmental catastrophe are precisely the kinds of slow-moving existential challenges that democracies deal with very badly.... Finally, there is the threat du jour corporations and the technologies they promote. pp.  5657. External links  edit  Artificial Intelligence at Wikipedias sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Wikimedia Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Artificial Intelligence . Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Thomason, Richmond. Logic and Artificial Intelligence . In Zalta, Edward N. ed.. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . AITopics  A large directory of links and other resources maintained by the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence , the leading organization of academic AI researchers. Artificial Intelligence , BBC Radio 4 discussion with John Agar, Alison Adam  Igor Aleksander  In Our Time , Dec. 8, 2005 Links to related articles v t e John McCarthy Artificial intelligence Circumscription Dartmouth workshop Frame problem Garbage collection Lisp McCarthy Formalism McCarthy 91 function Situation calculus Space fountain v t e Philosophy of mind Theories Behaviorism  Radical  Biological naturalism Cognitive psychology Computationalism Mindbody dualism Eliminative materialism Emergent materialism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Idealism Interactionism Materialism Monism Nave realism Neurophenomenology Neutral monism Occasionalism Psychoanalysis Parallelism Phenomenalism Phenomenology Physicalism identity theory Property dualism Representational Solipsism Substance dualism Concepts Abstract object Artificial intelligence Chinese room Cognition Cognitive closure Concept Concept and object Consciousness Hard problem of consciousness Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Ingenuity Intelligence Intentionality Introspection Intuition Language of thought Materialism Mental event Mental image Mental property Mental representation Mind Mindbody problem Non-physical entity New mysterianism Pain Privileged access Problem of other minds Propositional attitude Qualia Tabula rasa Understanding Zombie more... Related topics Metaphysics Philosophy of artificial intelligence   information   perception   self Portal Category Philosophers category Project Task Force v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analyticsynthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Commensurability Consilience Construct Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific law Scientific method Scientific revolution Scientific theory Testability Theory choice Theory-ladenness Underdetermination Unity of science Metatheory of science Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Instrumentalism Pragmatism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism   Reductionism   Determinism Rationalism   Empiricism Received view   Semantic view of theories Scientific realism   Anti-realism Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Vitalism Philosophy of Physics thermal and statistical Motion Chemistry Biology Environment Geography Social science Technology Engineering Artificial intelligence Computer science Information Mind Psychiatry Psychology Perception Space and time Related topics Alchemy Criticism of science Epistemology Faith and rationality History and philosophy of science History of science History of evolutionary thought Logic Metaphysics Pseudoscience Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Sociology of scientific knowledge Sociology of scientific ignorance Philosophers of science by era Ancient Plato Aristotle Stoicism Epicureans Medieval Averroes Avicenna Roger Bacon William of Ockham Hugh of Saint Victor Dominicus Gundissalinus Robert Kilwardby Early modern Francis Bacon Thomas Hobbes Ren Descartes Galileo Galilei Pierre Gassendi Isaac Newton David Hume Late modern Immanuel Kant Friedrich Schelling William Whewell Auguste Comte John Stuart Mill Herbert Spencer Wilhelm Wundt Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Henri Poincar Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Contemporary Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Albert Einstein Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Jrgen Habermas Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Daniel Dennett Portal Category v t e Evolutionary computation Main Topics Convergence evolutionary computing Evolutionary algorithm Evolutionary data mining Evolutionary multimodal optimization Human-based evolutionary computation Interactive evolutionary computation Algorithms Cellular evolutionary algorithm Covariance Matrix Adaptation Evolution Strategy CMA-ES Differential evolution Evolutionary programming Genetic algorithm Genetic programming Gene expression programming Evolution strategy Natural evolution strategy Neuroevolution Learning classifier system Related techniques Swarm intelligence Ant colony optimization Bees algorithm Cuckoo search Particle swarm optimization Bacterial Colony Optimization Metaheuristic methods Grey Wolf Optimizer Firefly algorithm Harmony search Gaussian adaptation Memetic algorithm Related topics Artificial development Artificial intelligence Artificial life Digital organism Evolutionary robotics Fitness function Fitness landscape Fitness approximation Genetic operators Interactive evolutionary computation No free lunch in search and optimization Machine learning Mating pool Program synthesis Journals Evolutionary Computation journal v t e Computable knowledge Topics and concepts Alphabet of human thought Authority control Automated reasoning Commonsense knowledge Commonsense reasoning Computability Formal system Inference engine Knowledge base Knowledge-based systems Knowledge engineering Knowledge extraction Knowledge representation Knowledge retrieval Library classification Logic programming Ontology Personal knowledge base Question answering Semantic reasoner Proposals and implementations Zairja Ars Magna   1300 An Essay towards a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language   1688 Calculus ratiocinator and characteristica universalis   1700 Dewey Decimal Classification   1876 Begriffsschrift   1879 Mundaneum   1910 Logical atomism   1918 Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus   1921 Hilberts program   1920s Incompleteness theorem   1931 World Brain   1938 Memex   1945 General Problem Solver   1959 Prolog   1972 Cyc   1984 Semantic Web   2001 Evi   2007 Wolfram Alpha   2009 Watson   2011 Siri   2011 Knowledge Graph   2012 Wikidata   2012 Cortana   2014 Viv   2016 In fiction The Engine  Gullivers Travels , 1726 Joe  A Logic Named Joe , 1946 The Librarian  Snow Crash , 1992 Dr. Know  A.I. Artificial Intelligence , 2001 Waterhouse  The Baroque Cycle , 2003 See also Logic machines in fiction and List of fictional computers v t e Computer science Note This template roughly follows the 2012 ACM Computing Classification System . Hardware Printed circuit board Peripheral Integrated circuit Very Large Scale Integration Systems on Chip SoCs Energy consumption Green computing Electronic design automation Hardware acceleration Computer systems organization Computer architecture Embedded system Real-time computing Dependability Networks Network architecture Network protocol Network components Network scheduler Network performance evaluation Network service Software organization Interpreter Middleware Virtual machine Operating system Software quality Software notations and tools Programming paradigm Programming language Compiler Domain-specific language Modeling language Software framework Integrated development environment Software configuration management Software library Software repository Software development Software development process Requirements analysis Software design Software construction Software deployment Software maintenance Programming team Open-source model Theory of computation Model of computation Formal language Automata theory Computational complexity theory Logic Semantics Algorithms Algorithm design Analysis of algorithms Algorithmic efficiency Randomized algorithm Computational geometry Mathematics of computing Discrete mathematics Probability Statistics Mathematical software Information theory Mathematical analysis Numerical analysis Information systems Database management system Information storage systems Enterprise information system Social information systems Geographic information system Decision support system Process control system Multimedia information system Data mining Digital library Computing platform Digital marketing World Wide Web Information retrieval Security Cryptography Formal methods Security services Intrusion detection system Hardware security Network security Information security Application security Humancomputer interaction Interaction design Social computing Ubiquitous computing Visualization Accessibility Concurrency Concurrent computing Parallel computing Distributed computing Multithreading Multiprocessing Artificial intelligence Natural language processing Knowledge representation and reasoning Computer vision Automated planning and scheduling Search methodology Control method Philosophy of artificial intelligence Distributed artificial intelligence Machine learning Supervised learning Unsupervised learning Reinforcement learning Multi-task learning Cross-validation Graphics Animation Rendering Image manipulation Graphics processing unit Mixed reality Virtual reality Image compression Solid modeling Applied computing E-commerce Enterprise software Computational mathematics Computational physics Computational chemistry Computational biology Computational social science Computational engineering Computational healthcare Digital art Electronic publishing Cyberwarfare Electronic voting Video games Word processing Operations research Educational technology Document management Book Category Portal Outline WikiProject Commons v t e Emerging technologies Fields Agriculture Agricultural robot Cellular agriculture Closed ecological systems Cultured meat Genetically modified food Precision agriculture Vertical farming Architecture Arcology Building printing Contour crafting Domed city Biomedical Artificial uterus Ampakine Brain transplant Cryonics Cryoprotectant Cryopreservation Vitrification Suspended animation De-extinction Genetic engineering Gene therapy Head transplant Isolated brain Life extension Strategies for Engineered Negligible Senescence Nanomedicine Nanosensors Organ printing Personalized medicine Regenerative medicine Stem-cell therapy Tissue engineering Robot-assisted surgery Synthetic biology Synthetic genomics Virotherapy Oncolytic virus Tricorder Whole genome sequencing Displays Next generation FED FLCD iMoD Laser LPD OLED OLET QD-LED SED TPD TDEL TMOS MicroLED Screenless Bionic contact lens Head-mounted display Head-up display Optical head-mounted display Virtual retinal display Other Autostereoscopy Flexible display Holographic display Computer-generated holography Multi-primary color display Ultra HD Volumetric display Electronics Electronic nose E-textiles Flexible electronics Molecular electronics Nanoelectromechanical systems Memristor Spintronics Thermal copper pillar bump Twistronics Energy Production Airborne wind turbine Artificial photosynthesis Biofuels Carbon-neutral fuel Concentrated solar power Fusion power Home fuel cell Hydrogen economy Methanol economy Molten salt reactor Nantenna Photovoltaic pavement Space-based solar power Vortex engine Storage Beltway battery Compressed air energy storage Flywheel energy storage Grid energy storage Lithiumair battery Molten-salt battery Nanowire battery Research in lithium-ion batteries Siliconair battery Thermal energy storage Ultracapacitor Other Smart grid Wireless power Information and communications Ambient intelligence Internet of things Artificial intelligence Applications of artificial intelligence Progress in artificial intelligence Machine translation Mobile translation Machine vision Semantic Web Speech recognition Atomtronics Carbon nanotube field-effect transistor Cybermethodology Fourth-generation optical discs 3D optical data storage Holographic data storage GPGPU Memory CBRAM FRAM Millipede MRAM NRAM PRAM Racetrack memory RRAM SONOS Optical computing RFID Chipless RFID Software-defined radio Three-dimensional integrated circuit Manufacturing 3D printing Claytronics Molecular assembler Utility fog Materials science Aerogel Amorphous metal Artificial muscle Conductive polymer Femtotechnology Fullerene Graphene High-temperature superconductivity High-temperature superfluidity Linear acetylenic carbon Metamaterials Metamaterial cloaking Metal foam Multi-function structures Nanotechnology Carbon nanotubes Molecular nanotechnology Nanomaterials Picotechnology Programmable matter Quantum dots Silicene Superalloy Synthetic diamond Military Antimatter weapon Caseless ammunition Directed-energy weapon Laser Maser Particle-beam weapon Sonic weapon Coilgun Railgun Plasma weapon Pure fusion weapon Stealth technology Vortex ring gun Neuroscience Artificial brain Braincomputer interface Electroencephalography Mind uploading Brain-reading Neuroinformatics Neuroprosthetics Bionic eye Brain implant Exocortex Retinal implant Quantum Quantum algorithms Quantum amplifier Quantum bus Quantum channel Quantum circuit Quantum complexity theory Quantum computing Quantum cryptography Quantum dynamics Quantum electronics Quantum error correction Quantum imaging Quantum information Quantum key distribution Quantum logic Quantum logic gates Quantum machine Quantum machine learning Quantum metamaterial Quantum metrology Quantum network Quantum neural network Quantum optics Quantum programming Quantum sensing Quantum simulator Quantum teleportation Robotics Domotics Nanorobotics Powered exoskeleton Self-reconfiguring modular robot Swarm robotics Uncrewed vehicle Space science Launch Fusion rocket Non-rocket spacelaunch Mass driver Orbital ring Skyhook Space elevator Space fountain Space tether Reusable launch system Propulsion Beam-powered propulsion Ion thruster Laser propulsion Plasma propulsion engine Helicon thruster VASIMR Nuclear pulse propulsion Solar sail Other Interstellar travel Propellant depot Laser communication in space Transport Aerial Adaptive compliant wing Backpack helicopter Delivery drone Flying car High-altitude platform Jet pack Pulse detonation engine Scramjet Spaceplane Supersonic transport Land Airless tire Alternative fuel vehicle Hydrogen vehicle Driverless car Ground effect train Hyperloop Maglev train Personal rapid transit Transit Elevated Bus Vactrain Vehicular communication systems Pipeline Pneumatic transport Automated vacuum collection Other Anti-gravity Cloak of invisibility Digital scent technology Force field Plasma window Immersive virtual reality Magnetic refrigeration Phased-array optics Topics Collingridge dilemma Differential technological development Disruptive Innovation Ephemeralization Exploratory engineering Fictional technology Proactionary principle Technological change Technological unemployment Technological convergence Technological evolution Technological paradigm Technology forecasting Accelerating change Moores law Technological singularity Technology scouting Technology readiness level Technology roadmap Transhumanism Category List v t e Robotics  outline  Main articles Outline Glossary Index History Future Geography Hall of Fame Ethics Laws Competitions AI competitions Types Anthropomorphic Humanoid Android Cyborg Claytronics Companion Animatronic Industrial Articulated arm Domestic Educational Entertainment Juggling Military Medical Service Disability Agricultural Food service Retailing BEAM robotics Soft robotics Uncrewed vehicle Classifications Biorobotics Aerial vehicle Ground vehicle Mobile robot navigation Microbotics Nanorobotics Robotic spacecraft Space probe Swarm Underwater Locomotion Tracks Walking Hexapod Climbing Self-balancing unicycle Research Evolutionary Kits Simulator Suite Open-source Software Adaptable Developmental Paradigms Ubiquitous Related Technological unemployment Fictional robots Category Outline v t e Risks from artificial intelligence Concepts AI box AI takeover Control problem Existential risk from artificial general intelligence Friendly artificial intelligence Instrumental convergence Intelligence explosion Machine ethics Superintelligence Technological singularity Organizations Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence Center for Applied Rationality Center for Security and Emerging Technology Centre for the Study of Existential Risk DeepMind Foundational Questions Institute Future of Humanity Institute Future of Life Institute Humanity Institute for Ethics and Emerging Technologies Leverhulme Centre for the Future of Intelligence Machine Intelligence Research Institute OpenAI People Nick Bostrom Stephen Hawking Bill Hibbard Bill Joy Elon Musk Steve Omohundro Huw Price Martin Rees Stuart J. Russell Jaan Tallinn Max Tegmark Frank Wilczek Roman Yampolskiy Eliezer Yudkowsky Sam Harris Other Open Letter on Artificial Intelligence Ethics of artificial intelligence Controversies and dangers of artificial general intelligence Artificial intelligence as a global catastrophic risk Superintelligence Paths, Dangers, Strategies Our Final Invention v t e Philosophy of mind Theories Behaviorism  Radical  Biological naturalism Cognitive psychology Computationalism Mindbody dualism Eliminative materialism Emergent materialism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Idealism Interactionism Materialism Monism Nave realism Neurophenomenology Neutral monism Occasionalism Psychoanalysis Parallelism Phenomenalism Phenomenology Physicalism identity theory Property dualism Representational Solipsism Substance dualism Concepts Abstract object Artificial intelligence Chinese room Cognition Cognitive closure Concept Concept and object Consciousness Hard problem of consciousness Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Ingenuity Intelligence Intentionality Introspection Intuition Language of thought Materialism Mental event Mental image Mental property Mental representation Mind Mindbody problem Non-physical entity New mysterianism Pain Privileged access Problem of other minds Propositional attitude Qualia Tabula rasa Understanding Zombie more... Related topics Metaphysics Philosophy of artificial intelligence   information   perception   self Portal Category Philosophers category Project Task Force v t e Subfields of and cyberneticians involved in cybernetics Subfields Polycontexturality Second-order cybernetics Catastrophe theory Connectionism Control theory Cybernetics in the Soviet Union Decision theory Engineering cybernetics Information theory Semiotics Synergetics Biological cybernetics Biosemiotics Biomedical cybernetics Biorobotics Computational neuroscience Homeostasis Management cybernetics Medical cybernetics Neurocybernetics Sociocybernetics Emergence Artificial intelligence Cyberneticians Maleyka Abbaszadeh Igor Aleksander William Ross Ashby Gregory Bateson Anthony Stafford Beer Natalia Bekhtereva Claude Bernard Ludwig von Bertalanffy Valentin Braitenberg Gordon S. Brown Walter Bradford Cannon Manfred Clynes Heinz von Foerster Charles Franois Jay Wright Forrester Jacque Fresco Buckminster Fuller Ranulph Glanville Ernst von Glasersfeld Pyotr Grigorenko N. Katherine Hayles Francis Heylighen Erich von Holst Jason Jixuan Hu Cliff Joslyn Stuart Kauffman Sergei P. Kurdyumov Allenna Leonard Alexander Lerner Niklas Luhmann Alexey Lyapunov Warren McCulloch Humberto Maturana Marian Mazur Margaret Mead Ulla Mitzdorf Talcott Parsons Gordon Pask Walter Pitts Qian Xuesen Alfred Radcliffe-Brown I. A. Richards Robert Trappl Valentin Turchin Jakob von Uexkll Stuart Umpleby Francisco Varela Frederic Vester Charles Geoffrey Vickers John N. Warfield William Grey Walter Kevin Warwick Norbert Wiener Jennifer Wilby Anthony Wilden v t e Computer science Note This template roughly follows the 2012 ACM Computing Classification System . Hardware Printed circuit board Peripheral Integrated circuit Very Large Scale Integration Systems on Chip SoCs Energy consumption Green computing Electronic design automation Hardware acceleration Computer systems organization Computer architecture Embedded system Real-time computing Dependability Networks Network architecture Network protocol Network components Network scheduler Network performance evaluation Network service Software organization Interpreter Middleware Virtual machine Operating system Software quality Software notations and tools Programming paradigm Programming language Compiler Domain-specific language Modeling language Software framework Integrated development environment Software configuration management Software library Software repository Software development Software development process Requirements analysis Software design Software construction Software deployment Software maintenance Programming team Open-source model Theory of computation Model of computation Formal language Automata theory Computational complexity theory Logic Semantics Algorithms Algorithm design Analysis of algorithms Algorithmic efficiency Randomized algorithm Computational geometry Mathematics of computing Discrete mathematics Probability Statistics Mathematical software Information theory Mathematical analysis Numerical analysis Information systems Database management system Information storage systems Enterprise information system Social information systems Geographic information system Decision support system Process control system Multimedia information system Data mining Digital library Computing platform Digital marketing World Wide Web Information retrieval Security Cryptography Formal methods Security services Intrusion detection system Hardware security Network security Information security Application security Humancomputer interaction Interaction design Social computing Ubiquitous computing Visualization Accessibility Concurrency Concurrent computing Parallel computing Distributed computing Multithreading Multiprocessing Artificial intelligence Natural language processing Knowledge representation and reasoning Computer vision Automated planning and scheduling Search methodology Control method Philosophy of artificial intelligence Distributed artificial intelligence Machine learning Supervised learning Unsupervised learning Reinforcement learning Multi-task learning Cross-validation Graphics Animation Rendering Image manipulation Graphics processing unit Mixed reality Virtual reality Image compression Solid modeling Applied computing E-commerce Enterprise software Computational mathematics Computational physics Computational chemistry Computational biology Computational social science Computational engineering Computational healthcare Digital art Electronic publishing Cyberwarfare Electronic voting Video games Word processing Operations research Educational technology Document management Book Category Portal Outline WikiProject Commons v t e Evolutionary computation Main Topics Convergence evolutionary computing Evolutionary algorithm Evolutionary data mining Evolutionary multimodal optimization Human-based evolutionary computation Interactive evolutionary computation Algorithms Cellular evolutionary algorithm Covariance Matrix Adaptation Evolution Strategy CMA-ES Differential evolution Evolutionary programming Genetic algorithm Genetic programming Gene expression programming Evolution strategy Natural evolution strategy Neuroevolution Learning classifier system Related techniques Swarm intelligence Ant colony optimization Bees algorithm Cuckoo search Particle swarm optimization Bacterial Colony Optimization Metaheuristic methods Grey Wolf Optimizer Firefly algorithm Harmony search Gaussian adaptation Memetic algorithm Related topics Artificial development Artificial intelligence Artificial life Digital organism Evolutionary robotics Fitness function Fitness landscape Fitness approximation Genetic operators Interactive evolutionary computation No free lunch in search and optimization Machine learning Mating pool Program synthesis Journals Evolutionary Computation journal v t e Emerging technologies Fields Agriculture Agricultural robot Cellular agriculture Closed ecological systems Cultured meat Genetically modified food Precision agriculture Vertical farming Architecture Arcology Building printing Contour crafting Domed city Biomedical Artificial uterus Ampakine Brain transplant Cryonics Cryoprotectant Cryopreservation Vitrification Suspended animation De-extinction Genetic engineering Gene therapy Head transplant Isolated brain Life extension Strategies for Engineered Negligible Senescence Nanomedicine Nanosensors Organ printing Personalized medicine Regenerative medicine Stem-cell therapy Tissue engineering Robot-assisted surgery Synthetic biology Synthetic genomics Virotherapy Oncolytic virus Tricorder Whole genome sequencing Displays Next generation FED FLCD iMoD Laser LPD OLED OLET QD-LED SED TPD TDEL TMOS MicroLED Screenless Bionic contact lens Head-mounted display Head-up display Optical head-mounted display Virtual retinal display Other Autostereoscopy Flexible display Holographic display Computer-generated holography Multi-primary color display Ultra HD Volumetric display Electronics Electronic nose E-textiles Flexible electronics Molecular electronics Nanoelectromechanical systems Memristor Spintronics Thermal copper pillar bump Twistronics Energy Production Airborne wind turbine Artificial photosynthesis Biofuels Carbon-neutral fuel Concentrated solar power Fusion power Home fuel cell Hydrogen economy Methanol economy Molten salt reactor Nantenna Photovoltaic pavement Space-based solar power Vortex engine Storage Beltway battery Compressed air energy storage Flywheel energy storage Grid energy storage Lithiumair battery Molten-salt battery Nanowire battery Research in lithium-ion batteries Siliconair battery Thermal energy storage Ultracapacitor Other Smart grid Wireless power Information and communications Ambient intelligence Internet of things Artificial intelligence Applications of artificial intelligence Progress in artificial intelligence Machine translation Mobile translation Machine vision Semantic Web Speech recognition Atomtronics Carbon nanotube field-effect transistor Cybermethodology Fourth-generation optical discs 3D optical data storage Holographic data storage GPGPU Memory CBRAM FRAM Millipede MRAM NRAM PRAM Racetrack memory RRAM SONOS Optical computing RFID Chipless RFID Software-defined radio Three-dimensional integrated circuit Manufacturing 3D printing Claytronics Molecular assembler Utility fog Materials science Aerogel Amorphous metal Artificial muscle Conductive polymer Femtotechnology Fullerene Graphene High-temperature superconductivity High-temperature superfluidity Linear acetylenic carbon Metamaterials Metamaterial cloaking Metal foam Multi-function structures Nanotechnology Carbon nanotubes Molecular nanotechnology Nanomaterials Picotechnology Programmable matter Quantum dots Silicene Superalloy Synthetic diamond Military Antimatter weapon Caseless ammunition Directed-energy weapon Laser Maser Particle-beam weapon Sonic weapon Coilgun Railgun Plasma weapon Pure fusion weapon Stealth technology Vortex ring gun Neuroscience Artificial brain Braincomputer interface Electroencephalography Mind uploading Brain-reading Neuroinformatics Neuroprosthetics Bionic eye Brain implant Exocortex Retinal implant Quantum Quantum algorithms Quantum amplifier Quantum bus Quantum channel Quantum circuit Quantum complexity theory Quantum computing Quantum cryptography Quantum dynamics Quantum electronics Quantum error correction Quantum imaging Quantum information Quantum key distribution Quantum logic Quantum logic gates Quantum machine Quantum machine learning Quantum metamaterial Quantum metrology Quantum network Quantum neural network Quantum optics Quantum programming Quantum sensing Quantum simulator Quantum teleportation Robotics Domotics Nanorobotics Powered exoskeleton Self-reconfiguring modular robot Swarm robotics Uncrewed vehicle Space science Launch Fusion rocket Non-rocket spacelaunch Mass driver Orbital ring Skyhook Space elevator Space fountain Space tether Reusable launch system Propulsion Beam-powered propulsion Ion thruster Laser propulsion Plasma propulsion engine Helicon thruster VASIMR Nuclear pulse propulsion Solar sail Other Interstellar travel Propellant depot Laser communication in space Transport Aerial Adaptive compliant wing Backpack helicopter Delivery drone Flying car High-altitude platform Jet pack Pulse detonation engine Scramjet Spaceplane Supersonic transport Land Airless tire Alternative fuel vehicle Hydrogen vehicle Driverless car Ground effect train Hyperloop Maglev train Personal rapid transit Transit Elevated Bus Vactrain Vehicular communication systems Pipeline Pneumatic transport Automated vacuum collection Other Anti-gravity Cloak of invisibility Digital scent technology Force field Plasma window Immersive virtual reality Magnetic refrigeration Phased-array optics Topics Collingridge dilemma Differential technological development Disruptive Innovation Ephemeralization Exploratory engineering Fictional technology Proactionary principle Technological change Technological unemployment Technological convergence Technological evolution Technological paradigm Technology forecasting Accelerating change Moores law Technological singularity Technology scouting Technology readiness level Technology roadmap Transhumanism Category List v t e Glossaries of science and engineering Aerospace engineering Archaeology Architecture Artificial intelligence Astronomy Biology Botany Calculus Chemistry Civil engineering Clinical research Computer science Ecology Economics Electrical and electronics engineering Engineering Entomology Environmental science Genetics Geography Geology Machine vision Mathematics Mechanical engineering Medicine Meteorology Physics Probability and statistics Psychiatry Robotics Speciation Structural engineering Authority control BNF  cb11932084t data GND  4033447-8 LCCN  sh85008180 NDL  00574798 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleArtificial_intelligence oldid914613493  Categories  Artificial intelligence Cybernetics Formal sciences Technology in society Computational neuroscience Emerging technologies Unsolved problems in computer science Computational fields of study Hidden categories Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from December 2016 CS1 errors deprecated parameters CS1 Chinese-language sources zh Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from February 2011 Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors missing periodical Wikipedia pending changes protected pages Articles with short description All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2019 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from July 2019 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2019 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2016 All articles containing potentially dated statements Portal templates with all redlinked portals Portal-inline template with redlinked portals CS1 JulianGregorian uncertainty CS1 long volume value Use dmy dates from January 2018 Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers