Management by wandering around From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search The management by wandering around  MBWA , also management by walking around , 1  refers to a style of business management which involves managers wandering around, in an unstructured manner, through the workplaces, at random, to check with employees, equipment, or on the status of ongoing work. 1  The emphasis is on the word wandering as an unplanned movement within a workplace, rather than a plan where employees expect a visit from managers at more systematic, pre-approved or scheduled times. The expected benefit is that a manager, by random sampling of events or employee discussions, is more likely to facilitate improvements to the morale, sense of organizational purpose, productivity and total quality management of the organization, as compared to remaining in a specific office area and waiting for employees, or the delivery of status reports , to arrive there, as events warrant in the workplace. Contents 1 Similarities 2 History 3 See also 4 References Similarities  edit  Management by wandering around is very similar to the Japanese gemba walk method developed at Toyota . History  edit  The origin of the term has been traced to executives at the company Hewlett-Packard for management practices in the 1970s. 2  However, the general concept of managers making spontaneous visits to employees in the workplace has been a common practice in some other companies as well. Also, the management consultants Tom Peters and Robert H. Waterman had used the term in their 1982 book In Search of Excellence Lessons from Americas Best-Run Companies . 3  See also  edit  W. Edwards Deming Total quality management References  edit   a b What is management by walking around MBWA, BusinessDictionary.com, 2010, webpage BD-def-MBWA .  This was most particularly attributed to John Blocker, division manager at HPs New Jersey Division in Rockaway. Those of us working there though... really knew what he was doing... he was walking around the facility... BUMMING CIGARETTES. Still... it was an excellent way to keep your finger on the pulse of the activity, morale, etc., in the division and the style spread t hroughout the company over time. Leadership Elements A Guide to Building Trust , Mike Mears, 2009, 364 pages, p.51, Google Books link BooksG-TOC-51 .  In Search of Excellence , Tom Peters and Robert H. Waterman , 1982, 2004 360 pages, p.289, web BooksG-FOC-289 . Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleManagement_by_wandering_around oldid896938359  Categories  Quality management Business terms Walking