Styrene-butadiene From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Styrene-butadiene Identifiers CAS Number 9003-55-8   Y ECHA InfoCard 100.127.439 Except where otherwise noted, data are given for materials in their standard state at 25  C 77  F, 100  kPa. Y   verify   what is   Y N   Infobox  references Styrene-butadiene or styrene-butadiene rubber  SBR  describe families of synthetic rubbers derived from styrene and butadiene the version developed by Goodyear is called Neolite 1  . These materials have good abrasion resistance and good aging stability when protected by additives. In 2012, more than 5.4 million tonnes of SBR were processed worldwide. 2  About 50 of car tires are made from various types of SBR. The styrenebutadiene ratio influences the properties of the polymer with high styrene content, the rubbers are harder and less rubbery. 3  SBR is not to be confused with a thermoplastic elastomer made from the same monomers, styrene-butadiene block copolymer . Contents 1 Types of SBR 1.1 Emulsion polymerization 1.2 Solution polymerization 2 Buna S 3 Properties 4 Applications 5 History 6 See also 7 References Types of SBR  edit  SBR is derived from two monomers , styrene and butadiene . The mixture of these two monomers is polymerized by two processes from solution S-SBR or as an emulsion E-SBR. 4  E-SBR is more widely used. Emulsion polymerization  edit  E-SBR produced by emulsion polymerization is initiated by free radicals . Reaction vessels are typically charged with the two monomers, a free radical generator, and a chain transfer agent such as an alkyl mercaptan . Radical initiators include potassium persulfate and hydroperoxides in combination with ferrous salts. Emulsifying agents include various soaps . By capping the growing organic radicals, mercaptans e.g. dodecylthiol , control the molecular weight, and hence the viscosity, of the product. Typically, polymerizations are allowed to proceed only to ca. 70, a method called short stopping. In this way, various additives can be removed from the polymer. 3  Solution polymerization  edit  Solution-SBR is produced by an anionic polymerization process. Polymerization is initiated by alkyl lithium compounds . Water is strictly excluded. The process is homogeneous all components are dissolved, which provides greater control over the process, allowing tailoring of the polymer. The organolithium compound adds to one of the monomers , generating a carbanion that then adds to another monomer, and so on. For tire manufacture, S-SBR is increasingly favored because it offers improved wet grip and reduced rolling resistance, which translate to greater safety and better fuel economy, respectively. 5  Buna S  edit  The material was initially marketed with the brand name Buna S . Its name derives Bu for butadiene and Na for sodium  natrium in several languages including Latin, German, and Dutch, and S for styrene . 6  7  5  Properties  edit  Property S-SBR E-SBR Tensile strength MPa 18 20 Elongation at tear  565 635 Mooney viscosity 100  C 48.0 51.6 Glass transition temperature C 65 50 Polydispersity 2.1 4.5 Applications  edit  This section needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources   Styrene-butadiene     news    newspapers    books    scholar    JSTOR  September 2015   Learn how and when to remove this template message  It is a commodity material which competes with natural rubber . The elastomer is used widely in pneumatic tires . This application mainly calls for E-SBR, although S-SBR is growing in popularity. Other uses include shoe heels and soles, gaskets , and even chewing gum . 3  Latex emulsion SBR is extensively used in coated papers , being one of the cheapest resins to bind pigmented coatings. It is also used in building applications, as a sealing and binding agent behind renders as an alternative to PVA , but is more expensive. In the latter application, it offers better durability, reduced shrinkage and increased flexibility, as well as being resistant to emulsification in damp conditions. SBR is often used as part of cement based substructural basementwaterproofing systems where as a liquid it is mixed with water to form the Gauging solution for mixing the powdered Tanking material to a slurry. SBR aids the bond strength, reduces the potential for shrinkage and adds an element of flexibility. It is also used by speaker driver manufacturers as the material for Low Damping Rubber Surrounds. Additionally, it is used in some rubber cutting boards . SBR is also used as a binder in lithium-ion battery electrodes, in combination with carboxymethyl cellulose as a water-based alternative for, e.g. polyvinylidene fluoride . 8  Styrene-butane rubber is also used in gasketed-plate heat exchangers. It is used at moderate temperature up to 85 deg C, 358 K for aqueous systems. 9  History  edit  SBR is a replacement for natural rubber . It was originally developed prior to World War II in Germany by chemist Walter Bock in 1929. 10  Industrial manufacture began during World War II, and was used extensively by the U.S. Synthetic Rubber Program to produce Government Rubber-Styrene GR-S to replace the Southeast Asian supply of natural rubber which, under Japanese occupation, was unavailable to Allied nations . 11  12  See also  edit  Elastomer Ozone cracking Tire Synthetic rubber v t e Rubber Chemical types Natural rubber Synthetic rubber Butyl rubber Styrene-butadiene Nitrile rubber Silicone rubber Chloroprene rubber EPDM rubber Mechanical types Foam rubber Micronized rubber powder Cold rubber Additives Polymer additive Plasticizer Polymer stabilizers Biodegradable additives Filler materials Rubber processing Rubber tapping Rubber technology Vulcanization Industry Rubber industry in Malaysia Rubber Industry Smallholders Development Authority Rubber Board Michelin Dunlop Bridgestone United States Rubber Company Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company Rubber Manufacturers Association List of tire companies CategoryRubber industry Products Tires Rubber mulch Rubberized asphalt Rubber band CategoryRubber products Waste Rubber pollution Great Pacific garbage patch Persistent organic pollutant Dioxins Environmental hazards Tire-derived fuel Rubber recycling Airfield rubber removal Tire codes References  edit   Steven Di Pilla 2 June 2004, Slip and Fall Prevention A Practical Handbook , CRC, p.  82, ISBN   978-0-203-49672-5 .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Market Study Synthetic Rubber Archived copy . Archived from the original on 2015-03-18 . Retrieved 2013-08-23 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  CS1 maint archived copy as title  link  , published by Ceresana, June 2013  a b c Werner Obrecht, Jean-Pierre Lambert, Michael Happ, Christiane Oppenheimer-Stix, John Dunn, Ralf Krger 2012. Rubber, 4. Emulsion Rubber. Ullmanns Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry . Weinheim Wiley-VCH. doi  10.100214356007.o23_o01 . CS1 maint uses authors parameter  link   International Institute of Synthetic rubber Producers, Inc. IISRP  permanent dead link  article on S-SBR retrieved 2011-12-02  a b H.-D.Brandt et al. Rubber, 5. Solution Rubbers in Ullmanns Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry, 2012, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim. doi  10.100214356007.o23_o02  Mark Michalovic 2000 The Story of Rubber. Germany The Birth of Buna from The Polymer Learning Center and Chemical Heritage Foundation  Evonik Industries Invention and Production of Buna  httpwww.jsrmicro.beemerging-technologiesbattery-binderwater-based-anode-binder  K., Sinnott, R. 2009. Chemical engineering design . Towler, Gavin. 5th ed., SI ed.. Oxford Butterworth-Heinemamn. ISBN   9780750685511 . OCLC   774295558 .  Malcolm Tatum What is syrene-butadiene rubber from Wisegeek  Wendt, Paul 1947. The Control of Rubber in World War II. Southern Economic Journal . Southern Economic Association . 13 3 203227. doi  10.23071053336 .  Rubber Matters Solving the World War II Rubber Problem  Collaboration . Chemical Heritage Foundation . Archived from the original on December 5, 2014 . Retrieved 24 June 2013 . Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleStyrene-butadiene oldid909848391  Categories  Copolymers Elastomers Polymers U.S. Synthetic Rubber Program German inventions 1929 in science Hidden categories CS1 errors deprecated parameters CS1 maint archived copy as title CS1 maint uses authors parameter All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from June 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links Chemicals without a PubChem CID Articles without InChI source Chemical pages without ChemSpiderID Articles without EBI source Articles without KEGG source Articles without UNII source ECHA InfoCard ID from Wikidata Articles containing unverified chemical infoboxes Chembox image size set Articles needing additional references from September 2015 All articles needing additional references