Microwave engineering From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Microwave engineering pertains to the study and design of microwave circuits, components, and systems. Fundamental principles are applied to analysis, design and measurement techniques in this field. The short wavelengths involved distinguish this discipline from Electronic engineering . This is because there are different interactions with circuits, transmissions and propagation characteristics at microwave frequencies. Some theories and devices that pertain to this field are antennas , radar , transmission lines , space based systems  remote sensing , measurements, microwave radiation hazards and safety measures. During World War II microwave engineering played a significant role in developing radar that could accurately locate enemy ships and planes with a focused beam of EM radiation . The foundations of this discipline are found in Maxwells equations and the work of Heinrich Hertz , William Thomson s waveguide theory , J.C. Bose , the klystron from Russel and Varian Bross, as well as contributions from Perry Spencer, and others. 1  Contents 1 The microwave domain 2 Relevance 2.1 Education 2.2 Societies 2.3 Journals and other scholarly periodicals 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading The microwave domain  edit  Microwave is a term used to identify electromagnetic waves above 10 3 megahertz 1 Gigahertz up to 300 Gigahertz because of the short physical wavelengths of these frequencies. Short wavelength energy offers distinct advantages in many applications. For instance, sufficient directivity can be obtained using relatively small antennas and low-power transmitters. These characteristics are ideal for use in both military and civilian radar and communication applications. Small antennas and other small components are made possible by microwave frequency applications. The s ize advantage can be considered as part of a solution to problems of space, or weight, or both. Microwave frequency usage is significant for the design of shipboard radar because it makes possible the detection of smaller targets. Microwave frequencies present special problems in transmission, generation, and circuit design that are not encountered at lower frequencies. Convent ional circuit theory is based on voltages and currents while microwave theory is based on electromagnetic fields . 2  Apparatus and techniques may be described qualitatively as microwave when the wavelengths of signals are roughly the same as the dimensions of the equipment, so that lumped-element circuit theory is inaccurate. As a consequence, practical microwave technique tends to move away from the discrete resistors , capacitors , and inductors used with lower frequency radio waves . Instead, distributed circuit elements and transmission-line theory are more useful methods for design and analysis. Open-wire and coaxial transmission lines give way to waveguides and stripline , and lumped-element tuned circuits are replaced by cavity resonators or resonant lines. Effects of reflection , polarization , scattering , diffraction and atmospheric absorption usually associated with visible light are of practical significance in the study of microwave propagation . The same equations of electromagnetic theory apply at all frequencies. 1  3  Relevance  edit  The microwave engineering discipline has become relevant as the microwave domain moves into the commercial sector, and no longer only applicable to 20th and 21st century military technologies . Inexpensive components and digital communications in the microwave domain have opened up areas pertinent to this discipline. Some of these areas are radar, satellite , wireless radio , optical communication , faster computer circuits, and collision avoidance radar. 4  Education  edit  Many colleges and universities offer microwave engineering. A few examples follow. The University of Massachusetts Amherst provides research and educational programs in microwave remote sensing, antenna design and communications systems. Courses and project work are offered leading toward graduate degrees. Specialties include microwave and RF integrated circuit design, antenna engineering, computational electromagnetics, radiowave propagation, radar and remote sensing systems, image processing, a nd THz imaging. 5  6  Tufts University offers a Microwave and Wireless Engineering certificate program as part of its graduate studies programs. It can be applied toward a masters degree in electrical engineering. The student must have an appropriate bachelors degree to enroll in this program. 4  Auburn University offers research for the microwave arena. Wireless Engineering Research and Education Center is one of three research centers. The university also offers a Bachelor of Wireless Engineering degree with a Wireless Electrical Engineering major. 7  8  9  Bradley University offers an undergraduate and a graduate degree in its Microwave and Wireless Engineering Program. It has an Advanced Microwave Laboratory, a Wireless Communication Laboratory and other facilities related to research. 10  Societies  edit  There are professional societies pertinent to this discipline The IEEE Microwave Theory and Techniques Society MTT-S promotes the advancement of microwave theory and its applications.... The society also publishes peer reviewed journals, and one magazine. 11  Journals and other scholarly periodicals  edit  There are peer reviewed journals and other scholarly periodicals that cover topics that pertains to microwave engineering. Some of these are IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques , IEEE Microwave and Wireless Components Letters , Microwave Magazine, 12  IET Microwaves, Antennas  Propagation, 13  and Microwave Journal. 14  See also  edit  Artificial dielectrics Microwave transmission Winston E. Kock References  edit   a b Das, Annapurna , Sisir K. Das 20002009. Microwave engineering . McGraw-Hill core concepts in electrical engineering series. 1st ed.. McGraw-Hill Higher Education. ISBN   978-0-07-352950-9 . CS1 maint extra punctuation  link  CS1 maint date format  link  .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Module 11  Microwave Principles Free PDF download . Navy Electricity and Electronics Training Series NEETS . United States Navy . 1998. pp.  11 to 110 . Retrieved 2011-09-04 . Prepared by FTCM Frank E. Sloan  This article incorporates   public domain material from websites or documents of the United States Navy .  This paragraph was directly copied from the Wikipedia article entitled Microwave . September 04, 2011. However this material is covered by the reliable source provided in this article Das, Annapurna and Sisir K. Das. Microwave Engineering . McGraw-Hill Higher Education.  a b Microwave and Wireless Engineering 2011. Certificate program online web page . Tufts University . Retrieved 2011-09-12 .  Research Center  Labs online web page . University of Massachusetts Amherst . 2011 . Retrieved 18 October 2011 .  Graduate Degrees online web page . University of Massachusetts Amherst . 2011 . Retrieved 18 October 2011 .  Research and Outreach 2011. Overview online web page . Auburn University Alabama . Retrieved 2011-09-12 .  Undergraduate Programs online web page . Auburn University Alabama. 2011 . Retrieved 2011-09-12 .  Wireless Engineering Program Options online web page . Auburn University Alabama. 2011 . Retrieved 2011-09-12 .  Microwave and Wireless Engineering Program online web page . Bradley University Illinois. 2011 . Retrieved 2011-09-12 .  About MTT-S Online web page . Retrieved 2011-09-12 .  MTT-S Publications Online web page . Retrieved 2011-09-12 .  IET Microwaves, Antennas and Propagation Online web page . Institution of Engineering and Technology . Retrieved 2011-09-12 .  Microwave Journal Online web page . Horizon House Publications . Retrieved 2011-09-12 . Further reading  edit  Dong, Junwei 2009. Microwave Lens Designs   Optimization, Fast simulation algorithms, and 360-degree scanning techniques PDF PhD thesis. Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University. OCLC   469368809 . Docket etd-09242009-195704 . Retrieved September 1, 2011 . Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleMicrowave_engineering oldid883396515  Categories  Microwave technology Electrical engineering Hidden categories CS1 maint extra punctuation CS1 maint date format Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the United States Navy