Neoprene From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia    Redirected from Polychloroprene  Jump to navigation Jump to search A neck seal, wrist seal, manual vent, inflator, zip and fabric of a neoprene dry suit . Here the soft thin rubber-like seal material at neck and wrists is made from non-foam neoprene for elasticity the blue area is a thin blue knit fabric laminated onto spongy foamed neoprene for insulation. Chemical structure of the repeating unit of polychloroprene Neoprene also polychloroprene or pc-rubber  is a family of synthetic rubbers that are produced by polymerization of chloroprene . 1  Neoprene exhibits good chemical stability and maintains flexibility over a wide temperature range. Neoprene is sold either as solid rubber or in latex form and is used in a wide variety of applications, such as laptop sleeves, orthopaedic braces wrist, knee, etc., electrical insulation , liquid and sheet applied elastomeric membranes or flashings, and automotive fan belts . 2  Contents 1 Production 2 History 3 Applications 3.1 General 3.2 Civil engineering 3.3 Aquatics 3.4 Home accessories 3.5 Music 3.6 Hydroponic gardening 3.7 Other 4 Precautions 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Production  edit  Neoprene is produced by free-radical polymerization of chloroprene . In commercial production, this polymer is prepared by free radical emulsion polymerization. Polymerization is initiated using potassium persulfate . Bifunctional nucleophiles, metal oxides e.g. zinc oxide, and thioureas are used to crosslink individual polymer strands. 3  Property Value Appearance Hardness, Shore A 4095 Tensile failure stress, ultimate 5003000 PSI Elongation after fracture in    600 maximum Density Can be compounded around 1.23  gcm 3 Source 4  History  edit  Neoprene was invented by DuPont scientists on April 17, 1930 after Dr Elmer K. Bolton of DuPont attended a lecture by Fr Julius Arthur Nieuwland , a professor of chemistry at the University of Notre Dame . Nieuwlands research was focused on acetylene chemistry and during the course of his work he produced divinyl acetylene, a jelly that firms into an elastic compound similar to rubber when passed over sulfur dichloride . After DuPont purchased the patent rights from the university, Wallace Carothers of DuPont took over commercial development of Nieuwlands discovery in collaboration with Nieuwland himself and DuPont chemists Arnold Collins , Ira Williams and James Kirby. 5  Collins focused on monovinyl acetylene and allowed it to react with hydrogen chloride gas, manufacturing chloroprene . 6  DuPont first marketed the compound in 1931 under the trade name DuPrene, 7  but its commercial possibilities were limited by the original manufacturing process, which left the product with a foul odor. 8  A new process was developed, which eliminated the odor-causing byproducts and halved production costs, and the company began selling the material to manufacturers of finished end-products. 8  To prevent shoddy manufacturers from harming the products reputation, the trademark DuPrene was restricted to apply only to the material sold by DuPont. 8  Since the company itself did not manufacture any DuPrene-containing end products, the trademark was dropped in 1937 and replaced with a generic name, neoprene, in an attempt to signify that the material is an ingredient, not a finished consumer product. 9  DuPont then worked extensively to generate demand for its product, implementing a marketing strategy that included publishing its own technical journal, which extensively publicized neoprenes uses as well as advertising other companies neoprene-based products. 8  By 1939, sales of neoprene were generating profits over 300,000 for the company equivalent to 5,403,589 in 2018. 8  Applications  edit  General  edit  Two styles of well-worn Xtratuf boots made with neoprene Neoprene resists degradation more than natural or synthetic rubber . This relative inertness makes it well suited for demanding applications such as gaskets , hoses , and corrosion -resistant coatings . 1  It can be used as a base for adhesives , noise isolation in power transformer installations, and as padding in external metal cases to protect the contents while allowing a snug fit. It resists burning better than exclusively hydrocarbon based rubbers, 10  resulting in its appearance in weather stripping for fire doors and in combat related attire such as gloves and face masks. Because of its tolerance of extreme conditions, neoprene is used to line landfills. Neoprenes burn point is around 260  C 500  F. 11  In its native state, neoprene is a very pliable rubber-like material with insulating properties similar to rubber or other solid plastics. Neoprene foam is used in many applications and is produced in either closed-cell or open-cell form. The closed-cell form is waterproof , less compressible and more expensive. The open-cell form can be breathable . It is manufactured by foaming the rubber with nitrogen gas, where the tiny enclosed and separated gas bubbles can also serve as insulation. Nitrogen gas is most commonly used for the foaming of Neoprene foam due to its inertness, flame resistance, and large range of processing temperatures. 12  Civil engineering  edit  Neoprene is used as a load bearing base, usually between two prefabricated reinforced concrete elements or steel plates as well to evenly guide force from one element to another. 13  Aquatics  edit  Neoprene is a popular material in making protective clothing for aquatic activities. Foamed neoprene is commonly used to make fly fishing waders and wetsuits , as it provides excellent insulation against cold. The foam is quite buoyant, and divers compensate for this by wearing weights. Thick wet suits made at the extreme end of their cold water protection are usually made of 7  mm thick neoprene.  citation needed  Since foam neoprene contains gas pockets, the material compresses under water pressure, getting thinner at greater depths a 7  mm neoprene wet suit offers much less exposure protection under 100 feet of water than at the surface. A recent advance in neoprene for wet suits is the super-flex variety, which mixes spandex into the neoprene for greater flexibility.  citation needed  Neoprene waders are usually about 5  mm thick, and in the medium price range as compared to cheaper materials such as nylon and more expensive waterproof fabrics made with breathable membranes. Competitive swimming wetsuits are made of the most expanded foam they have to be very flexible to allow the swimmer unrestricted movement. The downside is that they are quite fragile.  citation needed  Home accessories  edit  Recently, neoprene has become a favorite material for lifestyle and other home accessories including laptop sleeves, tablet holders, remote controls , mouse pads , and cycling chamois. In this market, it sometimes competes with LRPu low-resilience polyurethane, which is a sturdier more impact-resistant but less-used material. Music  edit  The Rhodes piano used hammer tips made of neoprene in its electric pianos, after changing from felt hammers around 1970. 14  Neoprene is also used for speaker cones and drum practice pads. 15  Hydroponic gardening  edit  Hydroponic and aerated gardening systems make use of small neoprene inserts to hold plants in place while propagating cuttings or using net cups. Inserts are relatively small, ranging in size from 1.5 to 5 inches 4 to 13  cm. Neoprene is a good choice for supporting plants because of its flexibility and softness, allowing plants to be held securely in place without the chance of causing damage to the stem. Neoprene root covers also help block out light from entering the rooting chamber of hydroponic systems, allowing for better root growth and to help deter the growth of algae.  citation needed  Other  edit  Neoprene is used for Halloween masks and masks used for face protection, for insulating CPU sockets , to make waterproof automotive seat covers, in liquid and sheet-applied elastomeric roof membranes or flashings, and in a neoprene- spandex mixture for manufacture of wheelchair positioning harnesses. Because of its chemical resistance and overall durability, neoprene is sometimes used in the manufacture of dishwashing gloves, especially as an alternative to latex . In fashion, neoprene has been used by designers such as Gareth Pugh , Balenciaga , Rick Owens , Lanvin and Vera Wang . This trend, promoted by street style bloggers such as Jim Joquico of Fashion Chameleon, 16  gained traction and trickled down to mainstream fashion around 2014. A woman wearing neoprene leggings Precautions  edit  Some people are allergic to neoprene while others can get dermatitis from thiourea residues left from its production. The most common accelerator in the vulcanization of polychloroprene is ethylene thiourea ETU, which has been classified as reprotoxic . The European rubber industry project called SafeRubber focused on alternatives to the use of ETU. 17  See also  edit  Isoprene References  edit   a b Werner Obrecht, Jean-Pierre Lambert, Michael Happ, Christiane Oppenheimer-Stix, John Dunn and Ralf Krger Rubber, 4. Emulsion Rubbers in Ullmanns Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry, 2012, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim. doi  10.100214356007.o23_o01  Technical information  Neoprene PDF . Du Pont Performance Elastomers. October 2003. Italic or bold markup not allowed in publisher  help  .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Furman, Glenn E. 14 October 2005. Chloroprene Polymers. Encyclopedia of Polymer Science and Technology . Wiley Online Library. doi  10.10020471440264.pst053 .  Neoprene SBR Rubber Material Specs . Exonic Polymers. Archived from the original on 26 February 2019 . Retrieved 15 May 2019 .  Carothers, Wallace H. Williams, Ira. Collins, Arnold M. Kirby, James E. November 1931. ACETYLENE POLYMERS AND THEIR DERIVATIVES. II. A NEW SYNTHETIC RUBBER CHLOROPRENE AND ITS POLYMERS. Journal of the American Chemical Society . 53 11 42034225. doi  10.1021ja01362a042 .  Smith, John K. January 1985. The Ten-Year Invention Neoprene and Du Pont Research, 1930-1939. Technology and Culture . 26 1 34. doi  10.23073104528 .  Neoprene   1930 - Overview . DuPont Heritage . DuPont . Retrieved 29 March 2011 .  a b c d e Hounshell, David A. Smith, John Kenly 1988. Science and Corporate Strategy   Du Pont R D, 1902-1980 Repr. ed.. Cambridge Cambridgeshire Cambridge University Press. pp.  253257. ISBN   0-521-32767-9 .  Neoprene   1930 - In Depth . DuPont Heritage . DuPont . Retrieved 29 March 2011 .  Neoprene - polychloroprene . DuPont Elastomers . Retrieved 2008-04-09 . Italic or bold markup not allowed in publisher  help   3E Protect PDF . Msds.dupont.com . Retrieved 14 October 2017 .  Maier, Clive Calafut, Teresa 1998. Additives. Polypropylene The Definitive Users Guide and Databook . Plastics Design Library.  Damon Allen. Stiffness Evaluation of Neoprene Bearing Pads under Long-Term Loads . A Dissertation Presented to the Graduate School of The University Of Florida in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy. University Of Florida 2008  Steves Corner - Hammer Tips . Fenderrhodes.com . Retrieved 14 October 2017 .  4 Great Drum Mutes . Making Music . February 20, 2015 . Retrieved December 7, 2018 .  Neoprene When fashion hijacked chemistry . Fashion Chameleon .  A Safer Alternative Replacement for Thiourea Based Accelerators in the Production Process of Chloroprene Rubber . cordis.europa.eu . Retrieved 11 November 2017 . External links  edit  Wikimedia Commons has media related to Neoprene . Historical Files on Neoprene are available at Hagley Museum and Library v t e Rubber Chemical types Natural rubber Synthetic rubber Butyl rubber Styrene-butadiene Nitrile rubber Silicone rubber Chloroprene rubber EPDM rubber Mechanical types Foam rubber Micronized rubber powder Cold rubber Additives Polymer additive Plasticizer Polymer stabilizers Biodegradable additives Filler materials Rubber processing Rubber tapping Rubber technology Vulcanization Industry Rubber industry in Malaysia Rubber Industry Smallholders Development Authority Rubber Board Michelin Dunlop Bridgestone United States Rubber Company Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company Rubber Manufacturers Association List of tire companies CategoryRubber industry Products Tires Rubber mulch Rubberized asphalt Rubber band CategoryRubber products Waste Rubber pollution Great Pacific garbage patch Persistent organic pollutant Dioxins Environmental hazards Tire-derived fuel Rubber recycling Airfield rubber removal Tire codes v t e DuPont Selected Corporate directors Edward D. Breen Alexander M. Cutler Rajiv L. Gupta Products Corian FE-13 Hypalon Kalrez Kapton Kevlar Mylar Neoprene Nomex Nylon Sorona Teflon Tyvek Vespel Viton Zodiaq Zytel Subsidiaries and joint ventures DuPont Pioneer Danisco Solae DuPont Danisco Antec International Divisions and facilities DuPont Central Research DuPont Experimental Station DuPont Building Notable people leuthre Irne du Pont Alfred I. du Pont Eugene du Pont Francis Gurney du Pont Francis Irne du Pont Henry du Pont Lammot du Pont Pierre S. du Pont T. Coleman du Pont Jeffery Stanford Agate Anthony Joseph Arduengo III Samuel Bodman Norman Borlaug Donaldson Brown Richard H. Brown Wallace Carothers Uma Chowdhry Thomas M. Connelly Curtis J. Crawford John T. Dillon Linda Fisher Richard Goodmanson Charles O. Holliday Steven Ittel Edward G. Jefferson Ellen J. Kullman Stephanie Kwolek James Lynah Rudolph Pariser George Parshall Charles J. Pedersen William Dale Phillips Roy J. Plunkett John J. Raskob William K. Reilly Irving S. Shapiro Richard R. Schrock Joseph Shivers Howard Ensign Simmons Jr. Charles Stine Frederick N. Tebbe Chadwick A. Tolman Earl Tupper Charles M. Vest Edgar S. Woolard Jr. Nathaniel C. Wyeth History DuPont 18022017 Du Pont family Hagley Museum and Library Eleutherian Mills E. I. du Pont de Nemours Company Hercules Powder Company Atlas Chemical Industries B Reactor  Manhattan Project  Remington Arms Savannah River Site Kinetic Chemicals Wilmington Trust Conoco Inc. Consolidation Coal Company DuPont analysis DuPont v. Kolon Industries Du Pont Motors DuPont Building incl. The Playhouse on Rodney Square, formerly the DuPont Playhouse Chemours Sponsorship Tour DuPont DuPont Pioneer 250 Hendrick Motorsports The DuPont Show with June Allyson DuPont Show of the Month Category Commons Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleNeoprene oldid914555015  Categories  Brand name materials Dielectrics DuPont products Elastomers U.S. Synthetic Rubber Program Hidden categories CS1 errors markup All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2018 Commons category link is on Wikidata