The Pentagon Wars From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia    Redirected from Pentagon Wars  Jump to navigation Jump to search This article relies too much on references to primary sources . Please improve this by adding secondary or tertiary sources .  August 2010   Learn how and when to remove this template message  The Pentagon Wars Genre Comedy War Based on The Pentagon Wars by Col. James G. Burton Screenplay by Jamie Malanowski and Martyn Burke Directed by Richard Benjamin Starring Kelsey Grammer Cary Elwes Viola Davis John C. McGinley Olympia Dukakis Richard Benjamin Music by Joseph Vitarelli Country of origin United States Original languages English Production Executive producers Martyn Burke Danny DeVito Michael Shamberg Stacey Sher Gail Lyon co-executive producer Producers Howard Meltzer Gary Daigler co-producer Production locations Washington, D.C. Cinematography Robert Yeoman Editors Jacqueline Cambas Running time 1 h 43 min Production companys HBO Pictures Distributor HBO Release Original network HBO Original release February  28,  1998   1998-02-28  The Pentagon Wars is a 1998 HBO military comedy film directed by Richard Benjamin and based on the book The Pentagon Wars Reformers Challenge the Old Guard by Colonel James G. Burton, USAF retired. Plot  edit  Major General Partridge  Kelsey Grammer  is in charge of the Bradley Fighting Vehicle project, that has been in development for seventeen years at a cost of 14  billion. In an effort to curtail excessive spending by The Pentagon , Congress appoints an outsider, U.S. Air Force Lieutenant Colonel James Burton  Cary Elwes  to observe the testing of several new weapons in development, including the Bradley. Burton quickly becomes disillusioned by the way the process works in an atmosphere of corruption and inefficiency. He delves into the mountains of paper documenting the Bradleys development history and comes to the conclusion that it is a troop transport that cant carry troops, a reconnaissance vehicle thats too conspicuous to do reconnaissance, and a quasi-tank that has less armor than a snowblower, but has enough ammo to take out half of D.C.  Burtons attempts to test the Bradley under combat conditions are obstructed by Partridge and his two cronies, Colonel Bock  John C. McGinley  and Major Sayers  Tom Wright . But then Burton is contacted by Brigadier General Robert L. Smith  Richard Schiff , the frustrated officer previously in charge of the vehicles development program, who feeds him evidence on condition of anonymity. Burton confronts Master Sergeant Dalton  Clifton Powell , in charge of the testing range, who admits being ordered to manipulate the test results, but bitterly tells Colonel Burton that every officer who tries to conduct honest tests eventually buckles under the pressure to gain his next promotion. When Burton refuses to approve the Bradley without a live-fire test, insisting that the current version of the vehicle is a death trap, he loses his position and is ordered to Alaska. The report he is asked to write on the vehicle is rewritten by one of Partridges lieutenants. Following the Army rule book, Burton then sends a memorandum referencing the original report to every one who is technically involved in the project. This information leaks to the press and the resulting scandal leads to a United States congressional hearing . The hearing is humiliating to Partridge, who is ignorant of the Bradley overall and has to refer to the project documentation in order to answer even simple questions. The skeptical House Committee goes on to order the test that Burton has requested. The night before, Burton visits the barracks on the range and tells Dalton and his men that, regardless of whatever orders they have received from Partridge, it is their duty to their fellow soldiers to make sure the test is performed honestly. On the day of the test, Partridge, Bock, and Sayers fully expect to confirm their story that the vehicle is perfectly safe, but Dalton and his men have actually made sure that nobody can tamper with the Bradley. When hit by an anti-tank missile, the vehicle explodes spectacularly and stampedes the audience. Afterwards, Dalton and his men confide to Burton that they had already become convinced of his sincerity and were with him ever since. A postscript explains that the Bradley was extensively redesigned in response to Burtons demands, which significantly reduced casualties from its use during the Persian Gulf War . However, the system was too strong Partridge and his cronies earned their promotions and lucrative private sector jobs, while Colonel Burton was forced to retire. References  edit  James G. Burton, The Pentagon Wars Reformers Challenge the Old Guard Annapolis, MD Naval Institute Press, 1993, .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em ISBN   1-55750-081-9 Tim Weiners review, Corrupt From Top to Bottom, New York Times , October 3, 1993 External links  edit  The Pentagon Wars on IMDb v t e Films directed by Richard Benjamin My Favorite Year 1982 Racing with the Moon 1984 City Heat 1984 The Money Pit 1986 Little Nikita 1988 My Stepmother Is an Alien 1988 Downtown 1990 Mermaids 1990 Made in America 1993 Milk Money 1994 Mrs. Winterbourne 1996 The Pentagon Wars 1998 Laughter on the 23rd Floor 2001 The Shrink Is In 2001 Marci X 2003 The Goodbye Girl 2004 A Little Thing Called Murder 2006 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleThe_Pentagon_Wars oldid911395590  Categories  1998 films 1998 television films 1990s films 1990s comedy films American films American comedy films Films based on non-fiction books Films about the United States Armed Forces Films about military personnel Films about the military Bureaucracy in fiction Films directed by Richard Benjamin Films with screenplays by Martyn Burke HBO Films films FMC Corporation Films set in Washington, D.C. Films set in the 1980s Hidden categories Articles lacking reliable references from August 2010 All articles lacking reliable references Pages using infobox television with editor parameter