Katia Sycara From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Katia Sycara  Greek     is a professor in the Robotics Institute , School of Computer Science at Carnegie Mellon University internationally known for her research in artificial intelligence , particularly in the fields of negotiation , autonomous agents and multi-agent systems . She directs the Advanced Agent-Robotics Technology Lab at Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University. She also serves as academic advisor for PhD students at both Robotics Institute and Tepper School of Business . 1  Born in Greece , she went to the United States to pursue advanced education through various scholarships, including a Fulbright 1965-1969. She received a B.S. in Applied Mathematics from Brown University , M.S. in Electrical Engineering from the University of WisconsinMilwaukee , and Ph.D. in Computer Science from Georgia Institute of Technology . She was awarded an Honorary Doctorate from the University of the Aegean in 2004. Contents 1 Research 2 Awards and recognition 3 Professional Activities 4 References 5 External links Research  edit  Sycara is a pioneer in the field of semantic web , case-based reasoning , autonomous agents and multi-agent systems . 2  She has authored or co-authored more than 700 technical papers dealing with multi-agent systems , software agents , web services , semantic web , humancomputer interaction , human-robot interaction , negotiation , case-based reasoning and the application of these techniques to crisis action planning, scheduling , manufacturing , healthcare management , financial planning and e-commerce . 1 She has led multimillion-dollar research effort funded by DARPA , NASA , AFOSR , ONR , AFRL , NSF and industry. Through an ONR MURI program and though the COABS DARPA program, Prof. Sycaras group has developed the RETSINA multiagent infrastructure, a toolkit that enables the development of heterogeneous software agents that can dynamically coordinate in open information environments e.g. the Internet. RETSINA has been used in multiple applications including supporting human joint mission teams for crisis response creating autonomous age nts for situation awareness and information fusion financial portfolio management, negotiations and coalition formation for e-commerce, and coordinating robots for Urban Search and Rescue . Sycara is one of the contributors to the development of OWL-S, the Darpa-sponsored language for Semantic Web services, as well as matchmaking and brokering software for agent discovery, service integration and semantic interoperation. Awards and recognition  edit  Sycara is a Fellow of Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers  IEEE , and a Fellow of American Association for Artificial Intelligence  AAAI . Sycara is the recipient of the 2002 ACM SIGART Agents Research Award. She is also the recipient of the 2015 Group Decision and Negotiation GDN Award of the Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences INFORMS GDN Section for her outstanding contributions to the field of group decision and negotiation. According to the citation of the award .mw-parser-output .templatequoteoverflowhiddenmargin1em 0padding0 40px.mw-parser-output .templatequote .templatequoteciteline-height1.5emtext-alignleftpadding-left1.6emmargin-top0 Katia Sycara is widely acknowledged as one of the leading researchers in the field of autonomous software agents and in particular on problems related to joint decision making and negotiations of such agents. Her work is characterized by a unique combination of methods from Artificial Intelligence and research on human negotiations, and thus has contributed to significant advan ces in both fields. 3  Sycaras robot teams have won multiple international awards. In the 2005 Robocup Urban Search and Rescue US Open held in Atlanta , her team won the First-in-Class Award for Autonomy, and the First-in-Class Award for Mobility. Two years later, again in Atlanta, she led another team that became a world champions in the 2007 International Robocup Search and Rescue Simulation League Competition. In 2008, her robotic team placed third in the Worldwide Robocup Championship Competition in the Urban Search and Rescue Virtual robots League held in Beijing , China . In 2005, she received the Outstanding Alumnus Award from the University of WisconsinMilwaukee . Professional Activities  edit  Sycara is the founding Editor-in-Chief of the journal Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems  Editor-in-Chief, of the Springer Series on Agents and Area Editor of AI and Management Science , the journal Group Decision and Negotiation. She is a member of the Editorial Board, the Kluwer book series on Multiagent Systems, Artificial Societies and Simulated Organizations member of the editorial board, the journals Agent Oriented Software Engineering, Web Intelligence and Agent Technologies, Journal of Infonomics , Fundamenda Informaticae, and Concurrent Engineering Research and Applications and member of the editorial board of the ETAI journal on the Semantic Web 19982001. She was on the Editorial Board of IEEE Intelligent Systems and their Applications 19921996, and AI in Engineering 19901996. She is a member of the Scientific Advisory Board of France Telecom , 2003-2009 member of the Scientific Advisory Board of the Institute of Informatics and Telecommunications of the Greek National Research Center Demokritos, 2004-2012 member of the AAAI Executive Council 199699 member of the OASIS Technical committee on the development of UDDI Universal Description and Discovery for Interoperability software which is an industry standard and an invited expert for W3C the World Wide Web Consortium Working Group on Web Services Architecture. She was a founding member of the Board of Directors of the International Foundation of Multiagent Systems IFMAS, and founding member of the Semantic Web Science Association. Sycara served as the program chair of the Second International Semantic Web Conference ISWC 2003 general chair, of the Second International Conference on Autonomous Agents Agents 98 chair of the Steering Committee of the Agents Conference 19992001 scholarship chair of AAAI 19931999 and the US co-chair for the US-Europe Semantic Web Services Initiative. References  edit   Dai, Tinglong 2013, Incentives in U.S. Healthcare Operations PDF , Tepper School of Business PhD Dissertation , Pittsburgh, PA Carnegie Mellon University , retrieved 2017-10-31 .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Pioneers in Artificial Intelligence Retrieved 2017-10-31.  GDN section June 2015. GDN Section Award Citations . INFORMS . Retrieved 2017-10-31 . External links  edit  Homepage The Intelligent Software Agents Lab Robotics Institute International computing expert joins the University of Aberdeen CMU Robotics Institute developing communication tools for cars that can warn of traffic jams and map out alternative routes Authority control DBLP  sKatiaPSycara Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleKatia_Sycara oldid913087991  Categories  American women scientists Women computer scientists Women in engineering University of WisconsinMilwaukee alumni Carnegie Mellon University faculty Artificial intelligence researchers American roboticists Machine learning researchers Academics of the University of Aberdeen Living people Fellows of the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence American people of Greek descent Greek computer scientists Greek women computer scientists American computer scientists Women systems scientists Hidden categories Articles containing Greek-language text Wikipedia articles with DBLP identifiers Year of birth missing living people