Chemical reaction engineering From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search This article needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources   Chemical reaction engineering     news    newspapers    books    scholar    JSTOR  December 2009   Learn how and when to remove this template message  Part of a series on Chemical engineering Outline History Index Fundamentals Industry Engineer Process Unit operations Kinetics Transport phenomena Unit processes Chemical plant Chemical reactor Separation processes Aspects Heat transfer Mass transfer Fluid dynamics Process design Process control Chemical thermodynamics Reaction engineering Glossaries Glossary of chemistry Glossary of engineering Category v t e Chemical reaction engineering reaction engineering or reactor engineering is a specialty in chemical engineering or industrial chemistry dealing with chemical reactors . Frequently the term relates specifically to catalytic reaction systems where either a homogeneous or heterogeneous catalyst is present in the reactor. Sometimes a reactor per se is not present by itself, but rather is integrated into a process , for example in reactive separations vessels, retorts , certain fuel cells , and photocatalytic surfaces. The issue of solvent effects on reaction kinetics is also considered as an integral part. 1  Contents 1 Origin of chemical reaction engineering 2 Discipline 3 Books 4 ISCRE Symposia 5 Awards in Chemical Reaction Engineering 5.1 Neal R. Amundson Award for Excellence in Chemical Reaction Engineering 5.2 Rutherford Aris Young Investigator Award in Chemical Reaction Engineering 6 References 7 External links Origin of chemical reaction engineering  edit  Chemical reaction engineering as a discipline started in the early 1950s under the impulse of researchers at the Shell Amsterdam research center and the university of Delft. The term chemical reaction engineering was apparently coined by J.C. Vlugter while preparing the 1st European Symposium on Chemical Reaction Engineering which was held in Amsterdam in 1957. Discipline  edit  Chemical reaction engineering aims at studying and optimizing chemical reactions in order to define the best reactor design. Hence, the interactions of flow phenomena, mass transfer , heat transfer , and reaction kinetics are of prime importance in order to relate reactor performance to feed composition and operating conditions. Although originally applied to the petroleum and petrochemical industries, its general methodology combining reaction chemistry and chemical engineering concepts allows optimization of a variety of systems where modeling or engineering of reactions is needed. Chemical reaction engineering approaches are indeed tailored for the development of new processes and the improvement of existing technologies. Books  edit  The Engineering of Chemical Reactions 2nd Edition, Lanny Schmidt, 2004, Oxford University Press, .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em ISBN   0195169255 Chemical Reaction Engineering 3rd Edition, Octave Levenspiel, 1999, John Wiley  Sons, ISBN   9971512416 , ISBN   9789971512415 Elements of Chemical Reaction Engineering 4th Edition, H. Scott Fogler, 2005, Prentice Hall, ISBN   0130473944 , ISBN   9780130473943 Chemical Reactor Analysis and Design 2nd Edition, Gilbert F. Froment and Kenneth B. Bischoff, 1990, John Wiley  Sons, ISBN   0471510440 , ISBN   9780471510444 Fundamentals of Chemical Reaction Engineering 1st Edition, Mark E. Davis and Robert J. Davis, 2003, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., ISBN   007245007X , ISBN   9780072450071 ISCRE Symposia  edit  The most important series of symposia are the International Symposia on Chemical Reaction Engineering or ISCRE conferences . 2  These three-day conferences are held every two years, rotating among sites in North America, Europe, and the Asia-Pacific region, on a six-year cycle. These conferences bring together for three days distinguished international researchers in reaction engineering, prominent industrial practitioners, and new researchers and students of this multifaceted field. ISCRE symposia are a unique gathering place for reaction engineers where research gains are consolidated and new frontiers explored. The state of the art of various sub-disciplines of reaction engineering is reviewed in a timely manner, and new research initiatives are discussed. 3  Awards in Chemical Reaction Engineering  edit  The ISCRE Board administers two premiere awards in chemical reaction engineering for senior and junior researchers every three years. Neal R. Amundson Award for Excellence in Chemical Reaction Engineering  edit  In 1996, the ISCRE Board of Directors established the Neal R. Amundson Award for Excellence in Chemical Reaction Engineering. This award recognizes a pioneer in the field of Chemical Reaction Engineering who has exerted a major influence on the theory or practice of the field, through originality, creativity, and novelty of concept or application. The award is made every three years at an ISCRE meeting, and consists of a Plaque and a check in the amount of 5000. The Amundson Award is generously supported by a grant from the ExxonMobil Corporation. Winners of the award include 1996 Neal Amundson , Professor - University of Minnesota, University of Houston 1998 Rutherford Aris , Professor - University of Minnesota 2001 Octave Levenspiel , Professor - Oregon State University 2004 Vern Weekman, Mobil 2007 Gilbert Froment , Professor - University of Gent, Texas A M University 2010 Dan Luss , Professor - University of Houston 2013 Lanny Schmidt , Professor - University of Minnesota 2016 Milorad P. Dudukovic, Professor - Washington University 2019 W. Harmon Ray , Professor - University of Wisconsin 2022 Announced at NASCRE-5 Rutherford Aris Young Investigator Award in Chemical Reaction Engineering  edit  In 2016, the ISCRE, Inc. Board of Directors will bestow the first Rutherford Aris Young Investigator Award for Excellence in Chemical Reaction Engineering. 4  This award will recognize outstanding contributions in experimental andor theoretical reaction engineering research of investigators in early stages of their career. The recipient must be less than 40 years of age at the end of the calendar year in which the award is presented. The Aris Award is generously supported by a grant from the UOP, L.L.C., a Honeywell Company. The aw ard consists of a plaque, an honorarium of 3000, and up to 2000 in travel funds to present at an ISCRENASCRE conference and to present a lecture at UOP. This award complements ISCREs other major honor, the Neal R. Amundson Award. Winners of the award include 2016 Paul J. Dauenhauer, Professor - University of Minnesota, USA 2019 Yuriy Roman-Leschkov, Professor, MIT, USA. 2022 Announced at NASCRE-5 References  edit   History of ISCRE . Retrieved 28 December 2015 .  ISCRE Symposia .  A History of ISCRE Symposia .  ISCRE - Aris Young Investigator Award in Chemical Reaction Engineering . External links  edit  ISCRE web site v t e Chemical engineering topics History History of chemical engineering Concepts Unit operations Unit processes Chemical engineer Chemical process Unit operations Momentum transfer Heat transfer Mass transfer Unit process Chemical reaction engineering Chemical kinetics Chemical process modeling Branches Process design Fluid dynamics Chemical plant design Chemical thermodynamics Transport phenomena Others Outline of chemical engineering Index of chemical engineering articles Education for Chemical Engineers List of chemical engineers List of chemical engineering societies List of chemical process simulators Category PortalEngineering Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleChemical_reaction_engineering oldid886331801  Categories  Chemical reactors Chemical engineering Chemical reaction engineering Hidden categories Articles needing additional references from December 2009 All articles needing additional references