Canadian Information Processing Society From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search CIPS Canadian Information Processing Society - Canadas Association of Information Technology Professionals Type Not for profit Industry Professional Society Founded 1958 Headquarters Mississauga, Ontario , Canada Products Professionalism Number of employees 4 excluding volunteers Website httpwww.cips.ca CIPS Canadian Information Processing Society is the professional association of IT professionals in Canada. Since 1958 CIPS has helped strengthen the Canadian IT industry by establishing standards and sharing best practices for the benefit of individual IT professionals and the sector as a whole. As Canadas Association of Information Technology Professionals we represent thousands of members across the country. CIPS offers Networking opportunities, Certification of IT professionals I.S.P. and ITCP certifications, Accreditation of IT Post-Secondary programs, a niche IT Job Board , a voice to government, and represents Canadian IT professionals in international forums, encouraging and facilitating on-going professional development and safeguarding the public interest.   www.cips.ca Contents 1 History 2 Organization 3 Legislation 4 See also 5 References 6 External links History  edit  In September 1958 a dedicated group of data processors DP got together to talk about common concerns of DP workers. That conference demonstrated to participants the value of sharing ideas, networking with fellow professionals, and learning about coming changes in the technology, practices, and management of information systems. This event sparked the formation of The Computin g and Data Processing Society of Canada. In 1968, the society changed its name to the current Canadian Information Processing Society. In the mid-1980s, as the needs of information systems practitioners evolved, CIPS saw the need to develop a comprehensive professionalism program for the IT industry. The Information Systems Professional of Canada I.S.P. designation, a direct result of CIPS focus on professionalism, was introduced in May 1989. Today, we see a strong IT industry in Canada and CIPS Provincial societies across Canada serving thousands of IT professionals. Calvin Gotlieb helped found CIPS in 1958, 1  serving as its president from 1960 to 1961 see httpwww.cips.cafounding . 2  Calvin was elected as founding fellow in 2006. 3  4  The first President of CIPS was Fred Thomas serving in 1958 to 1959 see httpwww.cips.capresidents . Organization  edit  Each province has a provincial body that administers the legislation or regulation establishing the self-regulating professional body. This consists of the following bodies CIPS Alberta  North West Territories CIPS British Columbia  Yukon CIPS Manitoba CIPS New Brunswick CIPS Newfoundland and Labrador  Nunavut CIPS Nova Scotia CIPS Ontario CIPS Prince Edward Island CIPS Saskatchewan In Qubec, CIPS is partnered with the Rseau ACTION TI. 5  CIPS is the founding member organisation of the International Federation for Information Processing IFIP. 6  IFIP works on establishing international standards for information technology and software engineering. CIPS is also a member of South East Asia Regional Computer Confederation SEARCC and a founding member of IFIP IP3. 7  CIPS is also a constituent member of the ICCP, . 8  which is the Institute for Certification of Computing Professionals , based out of the USA, and dedicated to the establishment of high professional standards for the computer industry across North America. CIPS is also a member organization of the Federation of Enterprise Architecture Professional Organizations FEAPO, a worldwide association of professional organizations which have come together to provide a forum to standardize, professionalize, and otherwise advance the discipline of Enterprise Architecture . Legislation  edit  Alberta Professional and Occupational Associations Registration Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. P-26, Information Systems Professional Regulation, Alta. Reg. 391997 British Columbia Society Act, R.S.B.C. 1996 , s.s. 86-93  Occupational Titles Protection  New Brunswick Canadian Information Processing Society of New Brunswick Act, 2001, c. 49 Nova Scotia Canadian Information Processing Society of Nova Scotia Act, S.N.S. 2002, c. 3 Ontario An Act respecting Canadian Information Processing Society of Ontario, 1998, c. Pr21 Saskatchewan Canadian Information Processing Society of Saskatchewan Act, S.S. 2005, c. C-0.2 See also  edit  Association for Computing Machinery ACM related organisation in USA Australian Computer Society related organisation in Australia IEEE Computer Society IEEE CS Institution of Engineering and Technology IET International Federation for Information Processing IFIP Mountbatten Medal New Zealand Computer Society related organisation in New Zealand Computer Society of Southern Africa CSSA related organisation in South Africa Brazilian Computer Society SBC British Computer Society BCS related organisation in United Kingdom References  edit   Founder . CIPS . Retrieved April 1, 2010 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Calvin Gotlieb FCIPS Fellows profile . CIPS the Canadian Information Processing Society . Retrieved April 1, 2010 .  CIPS Fellow Members . CIPS the Canadian Information Processing Society . Retrieved April 1, 2010 .  Awards and Accolades May 2006 Gotlieb Elected Inaugural CIPS Fellow . University of Toronto . Retrieved April 1, 2010 .  About CIPS . CIPS . Retrieved April 3, 2010 .  IFIP General Assembly 1. Full Members . IFIP . Retrieved March 31, 2010 .  IP3 - Leading the Development of the Global IT Profession . IFIP IP3 . Retrieved March 31, 2010 .  About ICCP . ICCP . Retrieved April 3, 2010 . External links  edit  Canadian Information Processing Society website Rseau ACTION TI website CIPS National Presidents 1958 to 2008 CIPS Fellows CIPS Awards and Hall of Fame Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleCanadian_Information_Processing_Society oldid913957314  Categories  Professional associations based in Canada Computer science organizations Scientific organizations based in Canada Lobbying organizations in Canada Technology trade associations Trade associations based in Canada