Ivar Jacobson From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Ivar Jacobson Born  1939-09-02  September 2, 1939 age  80 Ystad , Sweden Residence Switzerland Nationality Swedish Alma  mater Chalmers Institute of Technology in Gothenburg , Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm Known  for components and component architecture, use-cases and use-case driven development, SDL , a major contributor to UML , Objectory, RUP, aspect-oriented software development, SEMAT, Essence Scientific career Fields Electrical Engineering , Computer Science , Software Engineering Institutions Ericsson , Objective Systems, Rational Software , IBM , Ivar Jacobson International Influences Gran Hemdahl, Dines Bjrner , Grady Booch , James Rumbaugh Influenced Grady Booch , James Rumbaugh This article contains content that is written like an advertisement . Please help improve it by removing promotional content and inappropriate external links , and by adding encyclopedic content written from a neutral point of view .  June 2019   Learn how and when to remove this template message  Ivar Hjalmar Jacobson born 1939 is a Swedish computer scientist and software engineer , known as major contributor to UML , Objectory , Rational Unified Process RUP, aspect-oriented software development and Essence. Contents 1 Biography 2 Work 2.1 Ericsson 2.2 Rational Software 2.3 Essential Unified Process 2.4 EssWork 2.5 SEMAT 3 Publications 4 References 5 External links Biography  edit  Ivar Jacobson was born in Ystad , Sweden on September 2nd, 1939. He received his Master of Electrical Engineering degree at Chalmers Institute of Technology in Gothenburg in 1962. After his work at Ericsson, he formalized the language and method he had been working on in his Ph.D. at the Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm in 1985 on the thesis Language Constructs for Large Real Time Systems. After his masters degree, Jacobson joined Ericsson and worked in R D on computerized switching systems AKE 1  and AXE including PLEX . After his PhD thesis in April 1987, he started Objective Systems with Ericsson as a major customer. A majority stake of the company was acquired by Ericsson in 1991, and the company was renamed Objectory AB . Jacobson developed the software method Object-Oriented Software Engineering OOSE published 1992, which was a simplified version of the commercial software process Objectory short for Object Factory. In October, 1995, Ericsson divested Objectory to Rational Software 2  and Jacobson started working with Grady Booch and James Rumbaugh , known collectively as the Three Amigos. When IBM bought Rational in 2003, Jacobson decided to leave, after he stayed on until May 2004 as an executive technical consultant. In mid-2003 Jacobson formed Ivar Jacobson International IJI 3  which operates across three continents with offices in the UK, the US, Sweden, Switzerland, China, and Singapore. Work  edit  Ericsson  edit  In 1967 at Ericsson, Jacobson proposed the use of software components in the new generation of software controlled telephone switches Ericsson was developing. In doing this he invented sequence diagrams , and developed collaboration diagrams. He also used state transition diagrams to describe the message flows between components. Jacobson saw a need for blueprints for software development. He was one of the original developers of the Specification and Design Language SDL. In 1975, SDL became a standard in the telecoms industry. At Objectory he also invented use cases as a way to specify functional software requirements. Rational Software  edit  At Rational, Jacobson and his friends, Grady Booch and James Rumbaugh , designed the UML and his Objectory Process evolved to become the Rational Unified Process under the leadership of Philippe Kruchten. Essential Unified Process  edit  In November 2005, Jacobson announced the Essential Unified Process or EssUP for short. EssUP was a new Practice-centric  clarification needed  software development process derived from established software development practices. It integrated practices sourced from three different process camps the unified process camp, the agile software development camp and the process improvement camp. Each one of them contributed different capabilities structure, agility and process improvement. Ivar has described EssUP as a super light and agile RUP.  citation needed  IJI  who  have integrated EssUP into Microsoft Visual Studio Team System and Eclipse .  citation needed  EssWork  edit  Standing on the experience of EssUP Ivar and his team, in particular Ian Spence and Pan Wei Ng, developed EssWork starting in 2006. EssWork is a framework for working with methods. It is based on a kernel of universal elements always prevalent in software development endeavors. On top of the kernel some fifteen practices have been defined. A team can create their own method by composing practices. SEMAT  edit  In November 2009, Jacobson, Bertrand Meyer and Richard Soley the Troika started an initiative called SEMAT Software Engineering Method and Theory to seek to develop a rigorous, theoretically sound basis for software engineering practice, and its wide adoption by industry and academia. SEMAT has been inspired by the work at IJI, but it is a fresh new start. It has resulted in Essence , which at the time of this writing has been recommended as an OMG standard. Publications  edit  Jacobson has published several books and articles, 4  a selection 1992. Object-Oriented Software Engineering A Use Case Driven Approach ACM Press With Magnus Christerson, Patrik Jonsson  Gunnar Overgaard. Addison-Wesley, 1992, .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em ISBN   0-201-54435-0 1994. The Object Advantage Business Process Reengineering With Object Technology ACM Press . With M. Ericsson  A. Jacobson. Addison-Wesley, ISBN   0-201-42289-1 1997. Software Reuse Architecture, Process, and Organization for Business Success ACM Press . With Martin Griss  Patrik Jonsson. Addison-Wesley, 1997, ISBN   0-201-92476-5 1999. The Unified Software Development Process . With Grady Booch  James Rumbaugh . Addison-Wesley Professional, 1999, ISBN   0-201-57169-2 2004. The Unified Modeling Language Reference Manual 2nd Edition . With Grady Booch  James Rumbaugh . Addison-Wesley Professional, 2004, ISBN   0-321-24562-8 2004. Aspect-Oriented Software Development With Use Cases Addison-Wesley Object Technology Series . With Pan-Wei Ng. Addison-Wesley, ISBN   0-321-26888-1 2005. The Unified Modeling Language User Guide 2nd Edition . With Grady Booch  James Rumbaugh . Addison-Wesley Professional, 2005, ISBN   0-321-26797-4 2013. The Essence of Software Engineering - Applying the SEMAT Kernel . With Pan Wei Ng , Paul Mc Mahon , Ian Spence and Svante Lidman . Addison-Wesley, 2013, ISBN References  edit   httpwww.ericssonhistory.comproductsthe-switchesAKE---an-electronic-dead-end  DBMS Interview - October 1996 Archived 2008-05-09 at the Wayback Machine  1  Ivar Jacobson at DBLP Bibliography Server External links  edit  Wikiquote has quotations related to Ivar Jacobson Ivar Jacobson International Ivar Jacobsons Blog EssWork Website v t e Software engineering Fields Computer programming Requirements engineering Software deployment Software design Software maintenance Software testing Systems analysis Formal methods Concepts Data modeling Enterprise architecture Functional specification Modeling language Orthogonality Programming paradigm Software Software archaeology Software architecture Software configuration management Software development methodology Software development process Software quality Software quality assurance Software verification and validation Structured analysis Orientations Agile Aspect-oriented Object orientation Ontology Service orientation SDLC Models Developmental Agile EUP Executable UML Incremental model Iterative model Prototype model RAD UP Scrum Spiral model V-Model Waterfall model XP Other SPICE CMMI Data model ER model Function model Information model Metamodeling Object model Systems model View model Languages IDEF UML USL SysML Software engineers Victor Basili Kent Beck Grady Booch Fred Brooks Barry Boehm Peter Chen Danese Cooper Ward Cunningham Tom DeMarco Edsger W. Dijkstra Delores M. Etter Martin Fowler Adele Goldstine Margaret Hamilton C. A. R. Hoare Lois Haibt Mary Jean Harrold Grace Hopper Watts Humphrey Michael A. Jackson Ivar Jacobson Alan Kay Nancy Leveson Stephen J. Mellor Bertrand Meyer David Parnas Trygve Reenskaug Winston W. Royce James Rumbaugh Mary Shaw Peri Tarr Elaine Weyuker Niklaus Wirth Edward Yourdon Related fields Computer science Computer engineering Project management Risk management Systems engineering Category Commons v t e Unified Modeling Language Actors Organizations Object Management Group UML Partners Persons Grady Booch Ivar Jacobson James Rumbaugh Concepts Object oriented Object-oriented programming Object-oriented analysis and design Object-oriented modeling Structure Actor Attribute Artifact Class Component Interface Object Package Profile diagram Behavior Activity Event Message Method State Use case Relationships Association Composition Dependency Generalization or Inheritance  Extensibility Profile Stereotype Other Multiplicity Diagrams Structure Class Component Composite structure Deployment Object Package Behaviour Activity State Machine Use case Interaction Communications Sequence Interaction overview Timing Derived languages Systems Modeling Language SysML UML eXchange Format UXF XML Metadata Interchange XMI Executable UML xUML Other topics Glossary of UML terms Rational Unified Process List of Unified Modeling Language tools Object Modeling in Color Authority control BNF  cb123493792 data DBLP  62383 GND  120987139 ISNI  0000 0001 1478 9573 LCCN  n92061500 NDL  00514078 NKC  xx0019736 NTA  097472794 SUDOC  032469551 VIAF  101886438 WorldCat Identities via VIAF 101886438 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleIvar_Jacobson oldid913232136  Categories  1939 births Living people People from Ystad Municipality Royal Institute of Technology alumni Software engineers Swedish computer scientists Unified Modeling Language Ericsson people Chalmers University of Technology alumni Swedish inventors People from Ystad Hidden categories Webarchive template wayback links Infobox person using alma mater Articles with hCards Articles with a promotional tone from June 2019 All articles with a promotional tone Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2019 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2019 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from June 2019 Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers Wikipedia articles with DBLP identifiers Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with ISNI identifiers Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers Wikipedia articles with NKC identifiers Wikipedia articles with NTA identifiers Wikipedia articles with SUDOC identifiers Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers Wikipedia articles with WorldCat-VIAF identifiers