WikipediaCiting sources From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Wikimedia page For information on referencing citations in Wikipedia articles, see HelpFootnotes , WikipediaInline citation , and HelpReferencing for beginners . For information about citing Wikipedia articles for use in work outside of Wikipedia, see WikipediaCiting Wikipedia . WPCS redirects here. For the essay about using common sense, see WPUCS . For WikiProject Computer Science, see WPCOMPSCI . For the Wikipedia cheatsheet, see HCS . WPREF redirects here. For the Wikipedia Reference desk, see WPRD . This page documents an English Wikipedia content guideline . It is a generally accepted standard that editors should attempt to follow, though it is best treated with common sense , and occasional exceptions may apply. Any substantive edit to this page should reflect consensus . When in doubt, discuss first on the talk page . Shortcuts WPCS WPCITE WPREF This page in a nutshell Cite reliable sources . You can add a citation by selecting from the drop-down menu at the top of the editing box . In markup , you can add a citation manually using ref tags . More elaborate and useful ways to cite sources are detailed below. A citation , also called a reference , note 1  uniquely identifies a source of information, e.g. Ritter, R. M. 2003. The Oxford Style Manual . Oxford University Press. p.  1. ISBN   978-0-19-860564-5 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em Wikipedias verifiability policy requires inline citations for any material challenged or likely to be challenged , and for all quotations, anywhere in article space . A citation or reference in an article usually has two parts. In the first part, each section of text that is either based on, or quoted from, an outside source is marked as such with an inline citation . The inline citation may be a superscript footnote number, or an abbreviated version of the citation called a short citation . The second necessary part of the citation or reference is the list of full references, which provides complete, formatted detail about the source, so that anyone reading the article can find it and verify it. This page explains how to place and format both parts of the citation. Each article should use one citation method or style throughout. If an article already has citations, preserve consistency by using that method or seek consensus on the talk page before changing it the principle is reviewed at   Variation in citation methods  . While you should try to write citations correctly, what matters most is that you provide enough information to identify the source. Others will improve the formatting if needed. See  HelpReferencing for beginners  for a brief introduction on how to put references in Wikipedia articles. Wikipedia guidelines Guidelines list Policies list Behavioral Assume good faith Conflict of interest Courtesy vanishing Disruptive editing Dont bite the newbies Dont edit to make a point Etiquette Dont game the system User pages Other behavioral guidelines WMF friendly space policy Discussions Talk page guidelines Signatures Content Citing sources External links Reliable sources medicine Fringe theories Non-free content Offensive material Dont copy long texts Dont create hoaxes Patent nonsense Portal namespace Other content guidelines Editing Article size Be bold Edit summary Understandability Other editing guidelines Organization Categories, lists, templates Categorization Disambiguation Style Manual of Style contents lists tables Deletion Deletion process Speedy keep Deletion guidelines for administrators Project content Project pages WikiProjects Templates User pages User boxes Shortcuts Subpages Other Naming conventions Notability v t e Contents 1 Types of citation 2 When and why to cite sources 2.1 Multimedia 2.2 When not to cite 3 What information to include 3.1 Examples 3.1.1 Books 3.1.2 Journal articles 3.1.3 Newspaper articles 3.1.4 Web pages 3.1.5 Sound recordings 3.1.6 Film, television, or video recordings 3.1.7 Other 3.2 Identifying parts of a source 3.2.1 Books and print articles 3.2.2 Audio and video sources 3.3 Links and ID numbers 3.3.1 Linking to pages in PDF files 3.3.2 Linking to Google Books pages 3.4 Say where you read it 3.5 Dates and reprints of older publications 3.6 Seasonal publication dates and differing calendar systems 3.7 Additional annotation 4 Inline citations 4.1 Footnotes 4.1.1 How to create the list of citations 4.1.2 How to place an inline citation using ref tags 4.1.3 Separating citations from explanatory footnotes 4.1.4 Avoiding clutter 4.1.5 Repeated citations 4.1.6 Citing multiple pages of the same source 4.1.7 Duplicate citations 4.1.8 Short citations 4.2 Parenthetical referencing 5 Citation style 5.1 Variation in citation methods 5.1.1 To be avoided 5.1.2 Generally considered helpful 6 Handling links in citations 6.1 Avoid embedded links 6.2 Convenience links 6.3 Indicating availability 6.4 Links to sources 6.5 Preventing and repairing dead links 7 Textsource integrity 7.1 Keeping citations close 7.2 Bundling citations 8 In-text attribution 9 General references 10 Dealing with unsourced material 11 Citation templates and tools 11.1 Metadata 11.2 Citation generation tools 11.3 Programming tools 11.4 Citation export tools 11.5 Reference management software 12 See also 13 Notes 14 Further reading 15 External links Types of citation .mw-parser-output .module-shortcutboxplainfloatrightborder1px solid aaabackgroundfffmargin0 0 0 1empadding0.3em 0.6em 0.2em 0.6emtext-aligncenterfont-size85font-weightbold.mw-parser-output .module-shortcutlistdisplayinline-blockborder-bottom1px solid aaamargin-bottom0.2emfont-weightnormal.mw-parser-output .module-shortcutanchordivpositionrelative top-3em.mw-parser-output li .module-shortcutanchordivfloatright Shortcut WPCITETYPE A full citation fully identifies a reliable source and, where applicable, the place in that source such as a page number where the information in question can be found. For example Rawls, John. A Theory of Justice . Harvard University Press, 1971, p. 1. This type of citation is usually given as a footnote , and is the most commonly used citation method in Wikipedia articles. An inline citation means any citation added close to the material it supports, for example after the sentence or paragraph, normally in the form of a footnote. A short citation is an inline citation that identifies the place in a source where specific information can be found, but without giving full details of the source  these will have been provided in a full bibliographic citation either in an earlier footnote, or in a separate section. For example Rawls 1971, p. 1. This system is used in some articles the short citations may be given either as footnotes, or as parenthetical references within the text. In-text attribution involves adding the source of a statement to the article text, such as Rawls argues that X. 5 This is done whenever a writer or speaker should be credited, such as with quotations, close paraphrasing , or statements of opinion or uncertain fact. The in-text attribution does not give full details of the source  this is done in a footnote in the normal way. See In-text attribution below. A general reference is a citation that supports content, but is not linked to any particular piece of material in the article through an inline citation. General references are usually listed at the end of the article in a References section. They are usually found in underdeveloped articles, especially when all article content is supported by a single source. They may also be listed in more dev eloped articles as a supplement to inline citations. When and why to cite sources Shortcut WPWHYCITE By citing sources for Wikipedia content, you enable users to verify that the information given is supported by reliable sources, thus improving the credibility of Wikipedia while showing that the content is not original research . You also help users find additional information on the subject and by giving attribution you avoid plagiarising the source of your words or ideas. In particular, sources are required for material that is challenged or likely to be challenged  if reliable sources cannot be found for challenged material, it is likely to be removed from the article. Sources are also required when quoting someone, with or without quotation marks, or closely paraphrasing a source. However, the citing of sources is not limited to those situations  editors are always encouraged to add or improve citations for any information contained in an article. Citations are especially desirable for statements about living persons, particularly when the statements are contentious or potentially defamatory. In accordance with the biography of living persons policy , unsourced information of this type is likely to be removed on sight. Multimedia For an image or other media file, details of its origin and copyright status should appear on its file page . Image captions should be referenced as appropriate just like any other part of the article. A citation is not needed for descriptions such as alt text that are verifiable directly from the image itself, or for text that merely identifies a source e.g., the caption  Belshazzars Feast 1635 for FileRembrandt-Belsazar.jpg . When not to cite Shortcut WPWHENNOTCITE Citations are not used on disambiguation pages sourcing for the information given there should be done in the target articles. Citations are often omitted from the lead section of an article, insofar as the lead summarizes information for which sources are given later in the article, although quotations and controversial statements, particularly if about living persons, should be supported by citations even in the lead. See WPLEADCITE for more information. What information to include Shortcuts WPCITEHOW WPHOWCITE Listed below is the information that a typical inline citation or general reference will provide, though other details may be added as necessary. This information is included in order to identify the source, assist readers in finding it, and in the case of inline citations indicate the place in the source where the information is to be found. If an article uses parenthetical referencing or short citations , then the inline citations will refer to this information in abbreviated form, as described in the relevant sections above. Use details in citing. Good citations are on the left, while citations on the right should be improved. Examples Books See also the template   cite book  . Citations for books typically include name of authors title of book volume when appropriate name of publisher place of publication date of publication of the edition chapter or page numbers cited, if appropriate edition, if not the first edition ISBN optional Citations for individually authored chapters in books typically include name of authors title of the chapter name of books editor name of book and other details as above chapter number or page numbers for the chapter optional In some instances, the verso of a book may record, Reprinted with corrections XXXX or similar, where XXXX is a year. This is a different version of a book in the same way that different editions are different versions. In such a case, record the year of the particular reprint, the edition immediately prior to this particular reprint if not the first edition and a note to say Reprint with correctio ns. If   cite   or similar is being used, the notation, Reprint with corrections, can be added immediately following the template.   Dates and reprints of older publications gives an example of appending a similar textual note. Journal articles See also the template   cite journal  . Citations for journal articles typically include name of the authors year and sometimes month of publication title of the article name of the journal volume number, issue number, and page numbers article numbers in some electronic journals DOI andor other identifiers are optional Newspaper articles See also the template   cite news  . Citations for newspaper articles typically include byline authors name, if any title of the article name of the newspaper in italics city of publication if not included in name of newspaper date of publication page numbers are optional Web pages Shortcut WPCITEWEB See also the template   cite web  . Citations for World Wide Web pages typically include URL of the specific web page where the referenced content can be found name of the authors title of the article title or domain name of the website publisher, if known date of publication page numbers if applicable the date you retrieved or accessed the web page required if the publication date is unknown Sound recordings Further information HelpReferences and page numbers   Other in-source locations Citations for sound recordings typically include name of the composers, songwriters, script writers or the like name of the performers title of the song or individual track title of the album if applicable name of the record label year of release medium for example LP, audio cassette, CD, MP3 file approximate time at which event or point of interest occurs, where appropriate Do not cite an entire body of work by one performer. Instead, make one citation for each work your text relies on. Film, television, or video recordings See also the template   cite AV media  . Citations for films, TV episodes, or video recordings typically include name of the director name of the producer, if relevant names of major performers the title of a TV episode title of the film or TV series name of the studio year of release medium for example film, videocassette, DVD approximate time at which event or point of interest occurs, where appropriate Other See also the template   cite album notes  . See also the template   cite comic  . See also the template   comic strip reference  . See also the template   cite conference   for conference reports or papers. See also the template   cite court   for court cases or legal decisions. See also the template   cite encyclopedia  . See also the template   cite episode   for TV or radio series. See also the template   cite mailing list  . See also the template   cite map  . See also the template   cite newsgroup  . See also the template   cite patent   for patents. See also the template   cite press release  . See also the template   cite thesis  . See also the template   cite video game  . Identifying parts of a source Shortcut WPPAGENUM Further information HelpReferences and page numbers When citing lengthy sources, you should identify which part of a source is being cited. Books and print articles Specify the page number or range of page numbers. Page numbers are not required for a reference to the book or article as a whole. When you specify a page number, it is helpful to specify the version date and edition for books of the source because the layout, pagination, length, etc. can change between editions. If there are no page numbers, whether in ebooks or print materials, then you can use other means of identifying the relevant section of a lengthy work, such as the chapter number or the section title. In some works, such as plays and ancient works, there are standard methods of referring to sections, such as Act 1, scene 2 for plays and Bekker numbers for Aristotles works. Use these methods whenever appropriate. Audio and video sources Specify the time at which the event or other point of interest occurs. Be as precise as possible about the version of the source that you are citing for example, movies are often released in different editions or cuts. Due to variations between formats and playback equipment, precision may not be accurate in some cases. However, many government agencies do not publish minute s and transcripts but do post video of official meetings online generally the subcontractors who handle audio-visual are quite precise. Links and ID numbers A citation ideally includes a link or ID number to help editors locate the source. If you have a URL web page link, you can add it to the title part of the citation, so that when you add the citation to Wikipedia the URL becomes hidden and the title becomes clickable. To do this, enclose the URL and the title in square bracketsthe URL first, then a space, then the title. For example   httpmonographs.iarc.frENGMonographsvol66mono66-7.pdf IARC Monographs On The Evaluation Of Carcinogenic Risks To Humans  Doxefazepam    . International Agency For Research On Cancer IARC. 66 97104. 1320 February 1996. For web-only sources with no publication date, the Retrieved date or the date you accessed the web page should be included, in case the web page changes in the future. For example Retrieved 15 July 2011 or you can use the accessdate parameter in the automatic WikipediarefToolbar 2.0 editing window feature. You can also add an ID number to the end of a citation. The ID number might be an ISBN for a book, a DOI digital object identifier for an article or some e-books, or any of several ID numbers that are specific to particular article databases, such as a PMID number for articles on PubMed . It may be possible to format these so that they are automatically activated and become clickable when added to Wikipedia, for example by typing ISBN or PMID followed by a space and the ID number. If your source is not available online, it should be available in reputable libraries, archives, or collections. If a citation without an external link is challenged as unavailable, any of the following is sufficient to show the material to be reasonably available though not necessarily reliable  providing an ISBN or OCLC number linking to an established Wikipedia article about the source the work, its author, or its publisher or directly quoting the material on the talk page, briefly and in context. Linking to pages in PDF files Shortcuts WPPAGELINKS WPBOOKLINKS Links to long PDF documents can be made more convenient by taking readers to a specific page with the addition of pagen to the document URL, where n is the page number. For example, using httpwww.domain.comdocument.pdfpage5 as the citation URL displays page five of the document in any PDF viewer that supports this feature. If the viewer or browser does not support it, it will display the first page instead. Linking to Google Books pages Shortcut WPGBOOKS Further information Wikipedia talkCiting sourcesArchive 29   Linking to Google Books pages Google Books sometimes allows numbered book pages to be linked to directly. Page links should only be added when the book is available for preview they will not work with snippet view. Keep in mind that availability varies by location. No editor is required to add page links, but if another editor adds them, they should not be removed without cause see the October 2010 RfC for further information. These can be added in several ways with and without citation templates Rawls, John. A Theory of Justice . Harvard University Press, 1971, p. 18. Or with a template Rawls, John 1971. A Theory of Justice . Harvard University Press. p.  18. Rawls 1971, p. 18 . Rawls 1971 , p. 18. Rawls 1971, p. 18 . Rawls 1971, 18 . In edit mode, the URL for p. 18 of A Theory of Justice can be entered like this using the   Cite book   template cite book lastRawls firstJohn titleA Theory of Justice publisherHarvard University Press date1971 page18 url httpsbooks.google.combooksidkvpby7HtAe0C pgPA18 or like this, in the first of the above examples, formatted manually Rawls, John. httpsbooks.google.combooksidkvpby7HtAe0C pgPA18  A Theory of Justice    . Harvard University Press, 1971, p. 18. When the page number is a Roman numeral , commonly seen at the beginning of books, the URL looks like this for page xvii Roman numeral 17 of the same book       httpsbooks.google.combooksidkvpby7HtAe0C pgPR17 The pgPR17 indicates page, Roman, 17, in contrast to the pgPA18 , page, Arabic , 18 the URL given earlier. You can also link to a tipped-in page , such as an unnumbered page of images between two regular pages. If the page contains an image that is protected by copyright, it will be replaced by a tiny notice saying copyrighted image. The URL for eleventh tipped-in page inserted after page 304 of The Selected Papers of Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony , looks like this       httpsbooks.google.combooksiddBs4CO1DsF4C pgPA304-IA11 The pgPA304-IA11 can be interpreted as page, Arabic, 304 inserted after 11. Note that the Citation Style 1 , Citation Style 2 and Citation Style Vancouver templates properly support links only in the url  and archive-url  parameters. Placing links in the page  or pages  parameters may not link properly and will cause mangled COinS metadata output. There is a Wikipedia citation tool for Google Books that may be helpful. Users may also link the quotation on Google Books to individual titles, via a short permalink which ends with their related ISBN, OCLC or LCCN numerical code. E.g. httpbooks.google.combooksvidISBN0521349931 , a permalink to the Google book with the ISBN code 0521349931. For further details, you may see How-to explanation on support.google.com. Say where you read it Shortcuts WPSAYWHEREYOUREADIT WPSAYWHEREYOUGOTIT WPSWYRT WPSWYGT WPSAYWHERE Say where you read it follows the practice in academic writing of citing sources directly only if you have read the source yourself. If your knowledge of the source is secondhandthat is, if you have read Jones 2010, who cited Smith 2009, and you want to use what Smith 2009 saidmake clear that your knowledge of Smith is based on your reading of Jones. When citing the source, write the following this formatting is just an example .mw-parser-output .templatequoteoverflowhiddenmargin1em 0padding0 40px.mw-parser-output .templatequote .templatequoteciteline-height1.5emtext-alignleftpadding-left1.6emmargin-top0 John Smith 2009. Name of Book I Havent Seen , Cambridge University Press, p. 99, cited in Paul Jones 2010. Name of Encyclopedia I Have Seen , Oxford University Press, p. 29. Or if you are using short citations Smith 2009, p. 99, cited in Jones 2010, p. 29. Note  The advice to say where you read it does not mean that you have to give credit to any search engines, websites, libraries, library catalogs, archives, subscription services, bibliographies, or other sources that led you to Smiths book. If you have read a book or article yourself, thats all you have to cite. You do not have to specify how you obtained and read it. So long as you are confident that you read a true and accurate copy, it does not matter whether you read the material using an online service like Google Books using preview options at a booksellers website like Amazon on an e-reader except to the extent that this affects page numbering through your library via online paid databases of scanned publications , such as JSTOR  using reading machines  or any other method. Dates and reprints of older publications Editors should be aware that older sources especially those in the public domain are sometimes reprinted with modern publication dates. When this occurs and the citation style being used requires it, cite both the original publication date, as well as the date of the re-publication. E.g. Darwin, Charles 1964 1859. On the Origin of Species facsimile of 1st ed.. Harvard University Press. This is done automatically in the   citation   and   cite book   templates when you use the orig-year  parameter. Alternately, information about the reprint can be appended as a textual note Boole, George 1854. An Investigation of the Laws of Thought on Which are Founded the Mathematical Theories of Logic and Probabilities . Macmillan. Reprinted with corrections, Dover Publications, New York, NY, 1958. Seasonal publication dates and differing calendar systems Publication dates, for both older and recent sources, should be written with the goal of helping the reader find the publication and, once found, confirm that the correct publication has been located. For example, if the publication date bears a date in the Julian calendar, it should not be converted to the Gregorian calendar. If the publication date was given as a season or holiday, such as Winter or Christmas of a particular year or two-year span, it should not be converted to a month or date, such as JulyAugust or December 25 . If a publication provided both seasonal and specific dates, prefer the specific one. Additional annotation In most cases it is sufficient for a citation footnote simply to identify the source as described in the sections above readers can then consult the source to see how it supports the information in the article. Sometimes, however, it is useful to include additional annotation in the footnote, for example to indicate precisely which information the source is supporting particularly when a single footnote lists more than one source  see   Bundling citations and   Textsource integrity , below . A footnote may also contain a relevant exact quotation from the source. This is especially helpful when the cited text is long or dense. A quotation allows readers to immediately identify the applicable portion of the reference. Quotes are also useful if the source is not easily accessible. In the case of non-English sources, it may be helpful to quote from the original text and then give an English translation. If the article itself contains a translation of a quote from such a source without the original, then the original should be included in the footnote. See the WPVerifiability   Non-English sources policy for more information. Inline citations Shortcuts WPINCITE WPINLINECITE Further information WikipediaInline citation Inline citations allow the reader to associate a given bit of material in an article with the specific reliable sources that support it. Inline citations are added using either footnotes long or short  or parenthetical references . This section describes how to add either type, and also describes how to create a list of full bibliography citations to support shortened footnotes or parenthetical references. If long or short inline citations placed in footnotes are used, the first editor to add footnotes to an article must create a section where the list of those citations is to appear. This is not necessary for inline parenthetical references, as these appear directly inline in the article prose. Footnotes See also HelpFootnotes How to create the list of citations This section, if needed, is usually titled Notes or References, and is placed at or near the bottom of the article. For more about the order and titles of sections at the end of an article which may also include Further reading and External links sections, see WikipediaFooters . With some exceptions discussed below, citations appear in a single section containing only the references   tag or the  Reflist  template. For example  References  Reflist The footnotes will then automatically be listed under that section heading. Each numbered footnote marker in the text is a clickable link to the corresponding footnote, and each footnote contains a caret that links back to the corresponding point in the text. Shortcut WPASL Scrolling lists, or lists of citations appearing within a scroll box , should never be used. This is because of issues with readability, browser compatibility, accessibility , printing, and site mirroring . note 2  If an article contains a list of general references , this is usually placed in a separate section, titled for example References. This usually comes immediately after the sections listing footnotes, if any. If the general references section is called References, then the citations section is usually called Notes. How to place an inline citation using ref tags Shortcut WPCITEFOOT Further information Footnotes the basics To create a footnote, use the ref ... ref  syntax at the appropriate place in the article text, for example Justice is a human invention. ref Rawls, John. A Theory of Justice. Harvard University Press, 1971, p. 1. ref  It... which will be displayed as something like Justice is a human invention. 1 It... It will also be necessary to generate the list of footnotes where the citation text is actually displayed for this, see the previous section. As in the above example, citation markers are normally placed after adjacent punctuation such as periods full stops and commas. Citations should not be placed within, or on the same line as, section headings. For exceptions, see the WPManual of Style   Punctuation and footnotes . Note also that no space is added before the citation marker. The citation should be added close to the material it supports, offering textsource integrity . If a word or phrase is particularly contentious, an inline citation may be added next to that word or phrase within the sentence, but it is usually sufficient to add the citation to the end of the clause, sentence, or paragraph, so long as its clear which source supports which part of the text. Separating citations from explanatory footnotes If an article contains both footnoted citations and other explanatory footnotes, then it is possible but not necessary to divide them into two separate lists using footnotes groups . The explanatory footnotes and the citations are then placed in separate sections, called for example Notes and References respectively. Avoiding clutter Shortcuts WPILCLUTTER WPINLINECLUTTER WPINLINECITECLUTTER Inline references can significantly bloat the wikitext in the edit window and can become difficult and confusing. There are two main methods to avoid clutter in the edit window Using list-defined references by collecting the full citation code within the reference list template , and then inserting them in the text with ref nameABC   tags. Inserting short citations see below that then refer to a full list of source texts Parenthetical references see below are an established subformat of this, which forgoes the use of inline notes and simply puts the short citation in the main body. As with other citation formats, articles should not undergo large-scale conversion between formats without consensus to do so. Note, however, that references defined in the reference list template can no longer be edited with the VisualEditor . Repeated citations Further information Footnotes using a source more than once For multiple use of the same inline citation or footnote, you can use the named references feature, choosing a name to identify the inline citation, and typing ref name name  text of the citation  ref  . Thereafter, the same named reference may be reused any number of times either before or after the defining use by typing the previous reference name, like this ref name name    . The use of the slash before the  means that the tag is self-closing, and the  ref  used to close other references must not be used in addition. The text of the name can be almost anything   apart from being completely numeric. If spaces are used in the text of the name , the text must be placed within double quotes. Placing all named references within double quotes may be helpful to future editors who do not know that rule. To help with page maintenance, it is recommended that the text of the name have a connection to the inline citation or footnote, for example author year page ref name Smith 2005 p94  text of the citation  ref  . Use straight quotation marks  to enclose the reference name. Do not use curly quotation marks  . Curly marks are treated as another character, not as delimiters. The page will display an error if one style of quotation marks is used when first naming the reference, and the other style is used in a repeated reference, or if a mix of styles is used in the repeated references. Citing multiple pages of the same source Shortcut WPIBID Further information HelpReferences and page numbers When an article cites many different pages from the same source, to avoid the redundancy of many big, nearly identical full citations, most Wikipedia editors use one of three options Short citations in footnotes Named references in conjunction with the  rp  or  r  templates to specify the page Short citations in parenthesis The use of ibid. or id. or similar abbreviations is discouraged, as these may become broken as new references are added  op. cit. is less problematic in that it should refer explicitly to a citation contained in the article however, not all readers are familiar with the meaning of the terms. If the use of ibid is extensive, use the   ibid   template. Duplicate citations Shortcut WPDUPCITES Please combine precisely duplicated full citations , in keeping with the existing citation style if any. Do not discourage editors, particularly inexperienced ones, from adding duplicate citations when the use of the source is appropriate, because a duplicate is usually better than no citation. But any editor should feel free to combine them, and doing so is the best practice on Wikipedia. Citations to different pages or parts of the same source can also be combined preserving the distinct parts of the citations, as described in the previous section. Any method that is consistent with the existing citation style if any may be used, or consensus can be sought to change the existing style. Short citations Shortcuts WPCITESHORT WPSFN Main page HelpShortened footnotes Some Wikipedia articles use short citations , giving summary information about the source together with a page number, as in ref Smith 2010, p. 1.  ref  . These are used together with full citations , which give full details of the sources, but without page numbers, and are listed in a separate References section. Short citations are used in articles that apply parenthetical referencing see below, but they can also be used as footnote citations, as described here. Forms of short citations used include author-date referencing  APA style , Harvard style , or Chicago style , and author-title or author-page referencing  MLA style or Chicago style. As before, the list of footnotes is automatically generated in a Notes or Footnotes section, which immediately precedes the References section containing the full citations to the source. Short citations can be written manually, or by using the sfn or harvnb templates. Note that templates should not be added without consensus to an article that already uses a consistent referencing style. The short citations and full citations may be linked so that the reader can click on the short note to find full information about the source. See the template documentation for details and solutions to common problems. For variations with and without templates, see wikilinks to full references . For a set of realistic examples, see these . This is how short citations look in the edit box The Sun is pretty big, ref  Miller 2005, p. 23. ref  but the Moon is not so big. ref  Brown 2006, p. 46. ref  The Sun is also quite hot. ref  Miller 2005, p. 34. ref   Notes  Reflist  References   Brown, Rebecca 2006. Size of the Moon, Scientific American, 5178 .  Miller, Edward 2005. The Sun. Academic Press . This is how they look in the article The Sun is pretty big, 1 but the Moon is not so big. 2 The Sun is also quite hot. 3 Notes  Miller 2005, p. 23.  Brown 2006, p. 46.  Miller 2005, p. 34. References Brown, Rebecca 2006. Size of the Moon, Scientific American , 5178. Miller, Edward 2005. The Sun . Academic Press. Shortened notes using titles rather than publication dates would look like this in the article Notes  Miller, The Sun , p. 23.  Brown, Size of the Moon, p. 46.  Miller, The Sun , p. 34. When using manual links it is easy to introduce errors such as duplicate anchors and unused references. The script UserUcuchaHarvErrors will show many related errors. Duplicate anchors may be found by using the W3C Markup Validation Service . Parenthetical referencing Further information WikipediaParenthetical referencing While most articles use footnote citations as described in the above sections, some articles use a parenthetical referencing style. Here, short citations in parentheses, such as Smith 2010, p. 1 , are placed within the article text itself. Full details of each source used are given in a full citation , e.g., Smith, John. Name of Book . Cambridge University Press, 2010 . The full citations are listed in alphabetical order, according to the authors surnames, at the end of the article in a References section. Several forms of short citation are used in Wikipedia see Short citations above. The inline citation and full citation may be linked using a template see linking inline and full citations  as with other citation templates, these should not be added to articles without consensus. This is how it looks in the edit box The Sun is pretty big Miller 2005, p. 1 , but the Moon is not so big Brown 2006, p. 2 . The Sun is also quite hot Miller 2005, p. 3 .  References   Brown, R 2006. Size of the Moon, Scientific American, 5178 .  Miller, E 2005. The Sun, Academic Press . This is how it looks in the article The Sun is pretty big Miller 2005, p. 1, but the Moon is not so big Brown 2006, p. 2. The Sun is also quite hot Miller 2005, p. 3. References Brown, R 2006. Size of the Moon, Scientific American , 5178. Miller, E 2005. The Sun , Academic Press. Notice that, unlike footnotes, parenthetical references are placed before adjacent punctuation such as commas and periods. Citation style Shortcut WPCITESTYLE While citations should aim to provide the information listed above, Wikipedia does not have a single house style , though citations within any given article should follow a consistent style. A number of citation styles exist including those described in the Wikipedia articles for Citation , APA style , ASA style , MLA style , The Chicago Manual of Style , Author-date referencing , the Vancouver system and Bluebook . Although nearly any consistent style may be used, avoid all-numeric date formats other than YYYY-MM-DD, because of the ambiguity concerning which number is the month and which the day. For example, 2002-06-11 may be used, but not 11062002 . The YYYY-MM-DD format should in any case be limited to Gregorian calendar dates where the year is after 1582. Because it could easily confused with a range of years, the format YYYY-MM is not used. Variation in citation methods Shortcuts WPCITEVAR WPWHENINROME Editors should not attempt to change an articles established citation style merely on the grounds of personal preference, to make it match other articles, or without first seeking consensus for the change. The arbitration committee ruled in 2006  Wikipedia does not mandate styles in many different areas these include but are not limited to American vs. British spelling, date formats, and citation style. Where Wikipedia does not mandate a specific style, editors should not attempt to convert Wikipedia to their own preferred style, nor should they edit articles for the sole purpose of converting them to their preferred style, or removing examples of, or references to, styles which they dislike. As with spelling differences , it is normal practice to defer to the style used by the first major contributor or adopted by the consensus of editors already working on the page, unless a change in consensus has been achieved. If the article you are editing is already using a particular citation style, you should follow it if you believe it is inappropriate for the needs of the article, seek consensus for a change on the talk page. If you are the first contributor to add citations to an article, you may choose whichever style you think best for the article. If all or most of the citations in an article consist of bare URLs, or otherwise fail to provide needed bibliographic data  such as the name of the source, the title of the article or web page consulted, the author if known, the publication date if known, and the page numbers where relevant  then that would not count as a consistent citation style and can be changed freely to insert such data. The data provided should be sufficient to uniquely identify the source, allow readers to find it, and allow readers to initially evaluate it without retrieving it. To be avoided When an article is already consistent, avoid switching between major citation styles, e.g. parenthetical and ref  tags , or replacing the preferred style of one academic discipline with anothers adding citation templates to an article that already uses a consistent system without templates, or removing citation templates from an article that uses them consistently changing where the references are defined, e.g. moving reference definitions in the reflist to the prose, or moving reference definitions from the prose into the reflist. Generally considered helpful The following are standard practice improving existing citations by adding missing information, such as by replacing bare URLs with full bibliographic citations an improvement because it aids verifiability , and fights linkrot  replacing some or all general references with inline citations an improvement because it provides more verifiable information to the reader, and helps maintain textsource integrity imposing one style on an article with inconsistent citation styles e.g., some of the citations in footnotes and others as parenthetical references an improvement because it makes the citations easier to understand and edit fixing errors in citation coding, including incorrectly used template parameters, and ref  markup problems an improvement because it helps the citations to be parsed correctly combining duplicate citations see   Duplicate citations , above . Handling links in citations As noted above under What information to include , it is helpful to include hyperlinks to source material, when available. Here we note some issues concerning these links. Avoid embedded links Embedded links to external websites should not be used as a form of inline citation, because they are highly susceptible to linkrot . Wikipedia allowed this in its early yearsfor example by adding a link after a sentence, like this httpmedia.guardian.co.uksitestory0,14173,1601858,00.html, which looks like this. 1 This is no longer recommended. Raw links are not recommended in lieu of properly written out citations, even if placed between ref tags, like this ref httpmedia.guardian.co.uksitestory0,14173,1601858,00.html ref  . Since any citation that accurately identifies the source is better than none, do not revert the good-faith addition of partial citations. They should be considered temporary, and replaced with more complete, properly formatted citations as soon as possible. Embedded links should never be used to place external links in the content of an article, like this  Apple, Inc. announced their latest product ... . Convenience links Further information WikipediaCopyrights   Linking to copyrighted works , and HelpCitation Style 1   Online sources A convenience link is a link to a copy of your source on a web page provided by someone other than the original publisher or author. For example, a copy of a newspaper article no longer available on the newspapers website may be hosted elsewhere. When offering convenience links, it is important to be reasonably certain that the convenience copy is a true copy of the original, without any changes or inappropriate commentary, and that it does not infringe the original publishers copyright. Accuracy can be assumed when the hosting website appears reliable. For academic sources , the convenience link is typically a reprint provided by an open-access repository , such as the authors universitys library or institutional repository . Such green open access links are generally preferable to paywalled or otherwise commercial and unfree sources. Where several sites host a copy of the material, the site selected as the convenience link should be the one whose general content appears most in line with WikipediaNeutral point of view and WikipediaVerifiability . Indicating availability Shortcut WPINDICATEAVAIL If your source is not available online, it should be available in reputable libraries, archives, or collections. If a citation without an external link is challenged as unavailable, any of the following is sufficient to show the material to be reasonably available though not necessarily reliable  providing an ISBN or OCLC number linking to an established Wikipedia article about the source the work, its author, or its publisher or directly quoting the material on the talk page, briefly and in context. Links to sources Shortcut WPSOURCELINKS For a source available in hardcopy , microform , andor online , omit, in most cases, which one you read. While it is useful to cite author, title, edition 1st, 2nd, etc., and similar information, it generally is not important to cite a database such as ProQuest , EBSCOhost , or JSTOR see the list of academic databases and search engines  or to link to such a database requiring a subscription or a third partys login. The basic bibliographic information you provide should be enough to search for the source in any of these databases that have the source. Dont add a URL that has a part of a password embedded in the URL. However, you may provide the DOI , ISBN , or another uniform identifier, if available. If the publisher offers a link to the source or its abstract that does not require a payment or a third partys login for access, you may provide the URL for that link. If the source only exists online, give the link even if access is restricted see WPPAYWALL . Preventing and repairing dead links See also WikipediaLink rot and HelpArchiving a source Shortcut WPDEADREF To help prevent dead links , persistent identifiers are available for some sources. Some journal articles have a digital object identifier DOI some online newspapers and blogs, and also Wikipedia, have permalinks that are stable. When permanent links arent available, consider archiving the referenced document when writing the article on-demand web archiving services such as WebCite  httpswww.webcitation.org  or the Wayback Machine  httpswww.archive.orgweb  are fairly easy to use see pre-emptive archiving . Dead links should be repaired or replaced if possible. Do not delete a citation merely because the URL is not working. Follow these steps when you encounter a dead URL being used as a reliable source to support article content Confirm status  First, check the link to confirm that it is dead and not temporarily down. Search the website to see whether it has been rearranged. The online service Is it down right now can help to determine if a site is down, and any information known. Check for a changed URL on the same Web site  Pages are frequently moved to different location on the same site as they become archive content rather than news. The sites error page may have a Search box alternatively, in the popular Google search engine the keyterm site is used, as in siteen.wikipedia.org New Zealand police vehicle markings and livery. Check for web archives  Many Web archiving services exist link to their archive of the URLs content, if available. Examples Internet Archive has billions of archived web pages. See WikipediaUsing the Wayback Machine . WebCite has billions of archived web pages. See WikipediaUsing WebCite . The UK Government Web Archive  httpswww.nationalarchives.gov.ukwebarchive  preserves 1500 UK central government websites. The Mementos interface allows you to search multiple archiving services with a single request using the Memento protocol. Unfortunately, the Mementos web page interface removes any parameters which are passed with the URL. If the URL contains a  it is unlikely to work properly. When entering the URL into the Mementos interface manually, the most common change needed is to change  to 3F. While making only this change will not be sufficient in all cases, it will work most of the time. The bookmarklet in the table below will properly encode URLs such that searches will work. If multiple archive dates are available, try to use one that is most likely to be the contents of the page seen by the editor who entered the reference on the access-date  . If that parameter is not specified, a search of the articles revision history can be performed to determine when the link was added to the article. For most citation templates, archive locations are entered using the archive-url  , archive-date  and url-status  parameters. The primary link is switched to the archive link when url-status dead . This retains the original link location for reference. If the web page now leads to a completely different website, set url-status usurped to hide the original website link in the citation. Note Some archives currently operate with a delay of 18 months before a link is made public. As a result, editors should wait 24 months after the link is first tagged as dead before declaring that no web archive exists. Dead URLs to reliable sources should normally be tagged with  dead link dateSeptember 2019 , so that you can estimate how long the link has been dead. Bookmarklets to check common archive sites for archives of the current page Archive.org javascript  void  window . open  httpsweb.archive.orgweb   location . href  WebCite javascript  void  window . open  httpwww.webcitation.orgquery.phpurl   location . href  Archive.is javascript  void  window . open  httpsarchive.todayrun1 url   location . href  Mementos interface javascript  void  window . open  httpwww.webarchive.org.ukmementossearch   encodeURIComponent  location . href   referrer   encodeURIComponent  document . referrer  Remove convenience links  If the material was published on paper e.g., academic journal, newspaper article, magazine, book, then the dead URL is not necessary. Simply remove the dead URL, leaving the remainder of the reference intact. Find a replacement source  Search the web for quoted text, the article title, and parts of the URL. Consider contacting the websiteperson that originally published the reference and asking them to republish it. Ask other editors for help finding the reference somewhere else, including the user who added the reference. Find a different source that says essentially the same thing as the reference in question. Remove hopelessly lost web-only sources  If the source material does not exist offline, and if there is no archived version of the web page be sure to wait 24 months, and if you cannot find another copy of the material, then the dead citation should be removed and the material it supports should be regarded as unverified if there is no other supporting citation. If it is material that is specifically required by policy to have an inline citation , then please consider tagging it with  citation needed  . It may be appropriate for you to move the citation to the talk page with an explanation, and notify the editor who added the now-dead link. Textsource integrity Shortcut WPINTEGRITY WPINTEGRITY redirects here. For WikiProject Integrity, see WPWPINTEGRITY . When using inline citations, it is important to maintain textsource integrity. The point of an inline citation is to allow readers and other editors to check that the material is sourced that point is lost if the citation is not clearly placed. The distance between material and its source is a matter of editorial judgment, but adding text without clearly placing its source may lead to allegations of original research , of violations of the sourcing policy , and even of plagiarism . Keeping citations close Editors should exercise caution when rearranging or inserting material to ensure that textsource relationships are maintained. References need not be moved solely to maintain the chronological order of footnotes as they appear in the article, and should not be moved if doing so might break the textsource relationship. If a sentence or paragraph is footnoted with a source, adding new material that is not supported by the existing source to the sentenceparagraph, without a source for the new text, is highly misleading if placed to appear that the cited source supports it. When new text is inserted into a paragraph, make sure it is supported by the existing or a new source. For example, when editing text originally reading The sun is pretty big. 1 Notes  Miller, Edward. The Sun . Academic Press, 2005, p. 1. an edit that does not imply that the new material is sourced by the same reference is The sun is pretty big. 1 The sun is also quite hot. 2 Notes  Miller, Edward. The Sun . Academic Press, 2005, p. 1.  Smith, John. The Suns Heat . Academic Press, 2005, p. 2. Do not add other facts or assertions into a fully cited paragraph or sentence N The sun is pretty big, but the moon is not so big. 1 The sun is also quite hot. 2 Notes  Miller, Edward. The Sun . Academic Press, 2005, p. 1.  Smith, John. The Suns Heat . Academic Press, 2005, p. 2. Include a source to support the new information. There are several ways to write this, including Y The sun is pretty big, 1 but the moon is not so big. 2 The sun is also quite hot. 3 Notes  Miller, Edward. The Sun . Academic Press, 2005, p. 1.  Brown, Rebecca. Size of the Moon, Scientific American , 517846.  Smith, John. The Suns Heat . Academic Press, 2005, p. 2. Bundling citations Shortcuts WPCITEBUNDLE WPBUNDLING Main page HelpCitation merging Further information WikipediaCitation overkill Sometimes the article is more readable if multiple citations are bundled into a single footnote. For example, when there are multiple sources for a given sentence, and each source applies to the entire sentence, the sources can be placed at the end of the sentence, like this. 4 5 6 7 Or they can be bundled into one footnote at the end of the sentence or paragraph, like this. 4 Bundling is also useful if the sources each support a different portion of the preceding text, or if the sources all support the same text. Bundling has several advantages It helps readers and other editors see at a glance which source supports which point, maintaining textsource integrity  It avoids the visual clutter of multiple clickable footnotes inside a sentence or paragraph It avoids the confusion of having multiple sources listed separately after sentences, with no indication of which source to check for each part of the text, such as this. 1 2 3 4 It makes it less likely that inline citations will be moved inadvertently when text is re-arranged, because the footnote states clearly which source supports which point. To concatenate multiple citations for the same content, semicolons or another character appropriate to the articles style can be used. The sun is pretty big, bright and hot. 1 Notes Semicolons  Miller, Edward. The Sun . Academic Press, 2005, p. 1 Brown, Rebecca. The Solar System, Scientific American , 517846 Smith, John. The Earths Star . Academic Press, 2005, p. 2 For multiple citations in a single footnote, each in reference to specific statements, there are several layouts available, as illustrated below. Within a given article only a single layout should be used. The sun is pretty big, but the moon is not so big. The sun is also quite hot. 1 Notes Bullets  For the suns size, see Miller, Edward. The Sun . Academic Press, 2005, p. 1. For the moons size, see Brown, Rebecca. Size of the Moon, Scientific American , 517846. For the suns heat, see Smith, John. The Suns Heat . Academic Press, 2005, p. 2. Line breaks  For the suns size, see Miller, Edward. The Sun . Academic Press, 2005, p. 1. For the moons size, see Brown, Rebecca. Size of the Moon, Scientific American , 517846. For the suns heat, see Smith, John. The Suns Heat . Academic Press, 2005, p. 2. Paragraph  For the suns size, see Miller, Edward. The Sun . Academic Press, 2005, p. 1. For the moons size, see Brown, Rebecca. Size of the Moon, Scientific American , 517846. For the suns heat, see Smith, John. The Suns Heat . Academic Press, 2005, p. 2. However, using line breaks to separate list items breaches WPAccessibility   Nobreaks  .mw-parser-output .inline-quote-talkfont-familyGeorgia,DejaVu Serif,serifcolor008560quotesnone.mw-parser-output .inline-quote-talk-italicfont-familyinheritfont-styleitalic.mw-parser-output .inline-quote-talk-marksquotes Do not separate list items with line breaks  br  . Use   plainlist      unbulleted list   ... . In-text attribution Shortcut WPINTEXT Further information WikipediaNeutral point of view   Attributing and specifying biased statements , and WikipediaManual of Style   Point of view In-text attribution is the attribution inside a sentence of material to its source, in addition to an inline citation after the sentence. In-text attribution should be used with direct speech a sources words between quotation marks or as a block quotation  indirect speech a sources words modified without quotation marks and close paraphrasing . It can also be used when loosely summarizing a sources position in your own words. It avoids inadvertent plagiarism and helps the reader see where a position is coming from. An inline citation should follow the attribution, usually at the end of the sentence or paragraph in question. For example N To reach fair decisions, parties must consider matters as if behind a veil of ignorance . 2 Y John Rawls argues that, to reach fair decisions, parties must consider matters as if behind a veil of ignorance . 2 Y John Rawls argues that, to reach fair decisions, parties must consider matters as if situated behind a veil of ignorance . 2 When using in-text attribution, make sure it doesnt lead to an inadvertent neutrality violation. For example, the following implies parity between the sources, without making clear that the position of Darwin is the majority view  N Charles Darwin says that human beings evolved through natural selection , but John Smith writes that we arrived here in pods from Mars. Y Humans evolved through natural selection , as first explained in Charles Darwin s The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex . Neutrality issues apart, there are other ways in-text attribution can mislead. The sentence below suggests The New York Times has alone made this important discovery N According to The New York Times , the sun will set in the west this evening. Y The sun sets in the west each evening. It is preferable not to clutter articles with information best left to the references. Interested readers can click on the ref to find out the publishing journal N In an article published in The Lancet in 2012, researchers announced the discovery of the new tissue type. 3 Y The discovery of the new tissue type was first published by researchers in 2012. 3 Simple facts such as this can have inline citations to reliable sources as an aid to the reader, but normally the text itself is best left as a plain statement without in-text attribution Y By mass, oxygen is the third most abundant element in the universe after hydrogen and helium. 4 General references Shortcut WPGENREF A general reference is a citation to a reliable source that supports content, but is not linked to any particular text in the article through an inline citation. General references are usually listed at the end of the article in a References section, and are usually sorted by the last name of the author or the editor. General reference sections are most likely to be found in underdeveloped articles, especially when all article content is supported by a single source. The disadvantage of general references is that textsource integrity is lost, unless the article is very short. They are frequently reworked by later editors into inline citations. The appearance of a general references section is the same as those given above in the sections on short citations and parenthetical references . If both cited and uncited references exist, their distinction can be highlighted with separate section names, e.g., References and General references. Dealing with unsourced material Shortcuts WPNOCITE WPBLPCITE If an article has no references at all, then If the entire article is Patent Nonsense , tag it for speedy deletion using criterion G1. If the article is a biography of a living person, it can be tagged with substprod blp to propose deletion. If its a biography of a living person and is an attack page, then it should be tagged for speedy deletion using criterion G10, which will blank the page. If the article doesnt fit into the above two categories, then consider finding references yourself, or commenting on the article talk page or the talk page of the article creator. You may also tag the article with the  unreferenced  template and consider nominating it for deletion . For individual unreferenced claims in an article If the article is a biography of a living person, then any contentious material must be removed immediately see Biographies of living persons . If the unreferenced material is seriously inappropriate, it may need to be hidden from general view, in which case request admin assistance . If the material added appears to be false or an expression of opinion, remove it and inform the editor who added the unsourced material. The  uw-unsourced1  template may be placed on their talk page. In any other case consider finding references yourself, or commenting on the article talk page or the talk page of the editor who added the unsourced material. You may place a  citation needed  or  dubious  tag against the added text. Citation templates and tools Shortcut WPCITECONSENSUS Further information WikipediaCitation templates and HelpCitation tools For a comparison of citations using templates with citations written freehand, see WikipediaCiting sourcesExample edits for different methods   Footnotes . Citation templates can be used to format citations in a consistent way. The use of citation templates is neither encouraged nor discouraged an article should not be switched between templated and non-templated citations without good reason and consensus  see Variation in citation methods , above. If citation templates are used in an article, the parameters should be accurate. It is inappropriate to set parameters to false values to cause the template to render as if it were written in some style other than the style normally produced by the template e.g., MLA style . Metadata Citations may be accompanied by metadata, though it is not mandatory. Most citation templates on Wikipedia use the COinS standard. Metadata such as this allow browser plugins and other automated software to make citation data accessible to the user, for instance by providing links to their librarys online copies of the cited works. In articles that format citations manually, metadata may be added manually in a span, according to the COinS specification . Citation generation tools UserArk25RefScript , a JavaScript bookmarklet  creates references in one click, works for many newspapers UserBadgettrg , Biomedical citation maker . uses Pubmed ID PMID or DOI or PMCID or NCT. Adds links to ACP Journal Club and Evidence-Based Medicine comments if present. UserZhaofeng LiReflinks  adds titles to bare url references and other cleanup TemplateRef info , which can aid evaluating what kind of citation style was used to write the article Based on Citoid  Cite templates in Visual Editor UserSalix albaCitoid a client for the mwcitoid server which generates Citation Style 1 templates from urls. RefTag  Reftag for Google Books  converts bare Google book links into   cite book   format. Reftag for DOI Reftag for New York Times Hosted on tools.wmflabs.org WikipediarefToolbar 2.0 , used in the Source Editor Citation bot formerly DOI bot automatically fixes common errors in individual pages, 2 generates wiki references from DOI and Pubmed identifiers example of DOI request  Yadkard  A web-based tool for generating shortened footnotes and citation using Google Books URLs, DOI or ISBN. Also supports some news websites. Wikipedia template filling  generates Vancouver style citations from PMIDs  PubMed IDs. Programming tools See also HelpCitation tools   Tools Wikicite is a free program that helps editors to create citations for their Wikipedia contributions using citation templates . It is written in Visual Basic .NET , making it suitable only for users with the .NET Framework installed on Windows, or, for other platforms, the Mono alternative framework. Wikicite and its source code is freely available see the developers page for further details. Wikicite is a program based on the original Wikicite source code. It features extra validation, bug fixes, additional cite templates such as cite episode as well as tools for stub sorting and more. It is also available for free under the Apache License 2.0 and is open source. UserRichiez has tools to automatically handle citations for a whole article at a time. Converts occurrences of pmid XXXX or isbn XXXX to properly formatted footnote or Harvard-style references. Written in Ruby and requires a working installation with basic libraries. pubmed2wikipedia.xsl an XSL stylesheet transforming the XML output of PubMed to Wikipedia refs. Citation export tools You can insert a link beside each citation in Wikipedia, allowing you to export the citation to a reference manager such as EndNote . To install the script just add the following line to SpecialMyPageskin.js applies to the currently selected skin or SpecialMyPagecommon.js applies to all skins importScript  UserSmith609endnote.js   Then Publish changes and follow the instructions at the top of that page to bypass your browsers cache . Reference management software Reference management software can output formatted citations in several styles, including BibTeX , RIS , or Wikipedia citation template styles. Comparison of reference management software  side-by-side comparison of various reference management software WikipediaCiting sources with Zotero  essay on using Zotero to quickly add citations to articles. Zotero by Roy Rosenzweig Center for History and New Media  license Affero GPL  is open-source software with local reference database which can be synchronized between several computers over the online database up to 300 MB without payment. EndNote by Thomson Reuters license proprietary Mendeley by Elsevier license proprietary Paperpile by Paperpile, LLC license proprietary Papers by Springer license proprietary See also How to cite WikipediaReferences dos and donts  a concise summary of some of the most important guidance on this page WikipediaReferencing for beginners  a simple practical guide to getting started WikipediaCitation templates  a full listing of various styles for citing all sorts of materials WikipediaVerification methods  listing examples of the most common ways that citations are used in Wikipedia articles WikipediaCiting sourcesExample edits for different methods  showing comparative edit mode representations for different citation methods and techniques WikipediaCiting sourcesFurther considerations WikipediaInline citation WikipediaExternal links  for information about the External links section WikipediaImproving referencing efforts WikipediaLayout  Further reading  for information about the Further reading section WikipediaList of sources WikipediaNesting footnotes WikipediaScientific citation guidelines  guidelines for dealing with scientific and mathematical articles WikipediaPlagiarism  Public-domain sources  guideline covering the inclusion of material in the public domain WikipediaHow to mine a source  essay on getting maximum information from cited material mwExtensionCite  details of the software which support the ref  parser hooks. Citation problems TemplateRefimprove  template to add to article or section where citations are needed TemplateText-source  template to add to article or section where textsource integrity is questioned WikipediaCitation needed  explanation of template to tag statements that need a citation WikipediaLink rot  guide to preventing link rot WikipediaCopyright problems  in case of text that has been copied verbatim inappropriately TemplateIrrelevant citation  citation does not say what it is claimed to say WikipediaWikiProject Citation cleanup  a group of people devoted to cleaning citations WikipediaCitation overkill  why too many citations on one fact can be a bad thing WikipediaBombardment  an essay regarding the overuse of citations WikipediaYou dont need to cite that the sky is blue  an essay advising do not cite already obvious information WikipediaYou do need to cite that the sky is blue  an essay advising just because something appears obvious to you does not mean it is obvious to everyone WikipediaVideo links  an essay discussing the use of citations linking to YouTube and other user-submitted video sites WikipediaReference database  essayproposal Changing citation style formats WPCITEVAR Notes  Words like citation and reference are used interchangeably on the English Wikipedia. On talk pages where the language can be more informal or in edit summaries or templates where space is a consideration, reference is often abbreviated ref with the plural refs . Footnote may refer specifically to citations using ref tag formatting or to explanatory text endnotes specifically refers to citations placed at the end of the page. See also WikipediaGlossary .  See this July 2007 discussion for more detail on why scrolling reference lists should not be used. Further reading Concordia Libraries Concordia University. Citation and Style Guides . New Oxford Style Manual . Oxford University Press. ISBN   978-0198767251 The Writers Workshop, Center for Writing Studies. Citation Styles Handbook APA , University of Illinois. The Writers Workshop, Center for Writing Studies. Citation Styles Handbook MLA , University of Illinois. University of Chicago Press. 2003. The Chicago Manual of Style , 16th edition. ISBN   978-0226104201 A writers practical guide to MLA documentation AMA Citation Style ChicagoTurabian Documentation Citation Guide  Turabian PDF . Guide to Citation Style Guides Uniform Requirements for Manuscripts Submitted to Biomedical Journals American Chemical Society reference style guidelines Citation Machine How to write citations External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Citation needed . reFill, expand bare references with ease Video tutorial on citing sources Part 1 , Part 2 v t e Wikipedia key policies and guidelines Five pillars What Wikipedia is not Ignore all rules Content Verifiability No original research Neutral point of view What Wikipedia is not Biographies of living persons Image use Article titles Notability Autobiography Citing sources Reliable sources medicine Do not include copies of lengthy primary sources Plagiarism Dont create hoaxes Fringe theories Patent nonsense External links Portal namespace Conduct Civility Consensus Editing policy Harassment Vandalism Ignore all rules No personal attacks Ownership of content Edit warring Dispute resolution Sock puppetry No legal threats Child protection Paid-contribution disclosure Assume good faith Conflict of interest Disruptive editing Do not disrupt Wikipedia to illustrate a point Etiquette Gaming the system Please do not bite the newcomers Courtesy vanishing Responding to threats of harm Deletion Deletion policy Proposed deletion Biographies Books Criteria for speedy deletion Attack page Oversight Revision deletion Enforcement Administrators Banning Blocking Page protection Editing Article size Be bold Disambiguation Hatnotes Talk page guidelines Signatures Broad-concept article Style Manual of Style Contents Accessibility Understandability Dates and numbers Images Layout Lead section Linking Lists Classification Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Template namespace Project content Project namespace WikiProjects User pages User boxes Shortcuts Subpages WMF List of policies Friendly space policy Licensing and copyright Privacy policy Values FAQ List of all policies and guidelines List of policies List of guidelines Lists of attempts in creating fundamental principles v t e Wikipedia referencing Policies and guidelines Verifiability Biographies of living persons Reliable sources Medicine Citing sources Scientific citations General advice Citation needed Find sources Combining sources Offline sources Referencing styles Citing sources Citation Style 1 Citation Style 2 Citation Style Vancouver LSA Comics Citation templates Reflist template Inline citations Footnotes Parenthetical referencing Punctuation and footnotes Shortened footnotes Nesting footnotes Help for beginners Reference-tags Citations quick reference Introduction to referencing Referencing with citation templates Referencing without using templates Referencing dos and donts Citing Wikipedia Advanced help Cite link labels Citation tools Cite errors Cite messages Converting between references formats Reference display customization References and page numbers Template documentation   Edit refs     Refref     Refref2     Refstart   Tools Wikipedia Library v t e Citation Style 1 General templates   Cite arXiv   arXiv preprints   Cite AV media   audio and visual   Cite AV media notes   audio and visual liner notes   cite bioRxiv   bioRxiv preprints   Cite book   books   Cite conference   conference papers   Cite encyclopedia   edited collections   Cite episode   radio or television episodes   Cite interview   interviews   Cite journal   academic journals and papers   Cite magazine   magazines   Cite mailing list   public mailing lists   Cite map   maps   Cite news   news articles   Cite newsgroup   online newsgroups   Cite podcast   audio or video podcast   Cite press release   press releases   Cite report   unpublished reports   Cite serial   audio or video serials   Cite sign   signs, plaques   Cite speech   speeches   Cite techreport   technical reports   Cite thesis   theses   Cite web   web sources Categories Citation Style 1 templates Documentation   Citation Style documentation   Citation Style 1 noticeboard Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleWikipediaCiting_sources oldid914391754  Categories  Wikipedia content guidelines Wikipedia style guidelines Wikipedia citation administration Wikipedia how-to Wikipedia verifiability Hidden categories Project pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages