European Engineer From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Eur-Ing Logo European Engineer  Eur Ing , or Eur-Ing. , sometimes given in all-caps or small caps EUR ING, EUR-ING. , etc. is an international professional qualification and title for highly qualified engineers used in over 32 European countries. 1  The title is pre-nominal , i.e. it is placed before rather than after the name as in the case of a post-nominal title such as that for academic degrees however, in some European countries, academic degrees are also pre-nominal. Contents 1 Qualification 2 Ireland and the UK 3 France 4 Belgium 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Qualification  edit  The title is granted after successful application to a national member of the European Federation of National Engineering Associations FEANI which includes representation from many European countries, including much of the European Union . It allows a person who has an engineering degree and usually an engineering professional qualification in one of the member countries to use the qualification in others, but this depends on local legislation. 2  In providing an acceptable common and highly professional standard, the European Engineer requires proven experience and competency in the application of scientific knowledge, level of professional skill, safety and environmental consciousness, sense of responsibility and the ability to communicate within the level of supervision received and given. A minimum total period of se ven years formation and practice, consisting of an accredited engineering degree, further advanced training and extensive responsible professional experience, is required by FEANI for the EUR ING title. 3  Recognition of the qualification and title are generally not specifically incorporated into national law. In all cases approval is only after peer review by the appropriate national engineering society . The EU Directive 8948EEC generally exempts a bearer from additional examination in the European Union. Names are also placed on the FEANI EUR ING Register maintained by FEANI in addition to national member registers. 4  Internationally, Canada is one of the countries that offers recognition of the qualification, in particular, for the licensing requirements pertaining to professional Canadian engineers. 5  6  7  Ireland and the UK  edit  In Ireland 8  and the United Kingdom , 9  the Chartered Engineer title is a prerequisite requirement for an application for the EUR ING title. In the United Kingdom the Privy Council has approved the use of the title, which can be displayed on a British passport. 10  France  edit  In France , it is the association Engineers and Scientists of France IESF which manages the applications for the attribution of the title of European Engineer EUR ING with the European Federation of national associations of engineers FEANI. A Masters level engineering degree recognised by the state Bac5, together with a minimum of five years of experience and training is require d for the application of the EUR ING title to FEANI. 11   circular reference  Belgium  edit  In Belgium a Master of Engineering degree together with further years of postgraduate experience and training is required for the application of the EUR ING title. This is achieved through the Committee of Belgian Engineers Comit des Ingnieurs Belges, CIBIC. FEANI also requests that the School of Engineering be accredited by a EUR-ACE Seal of Excellence. In the French-speaking part of Belgium Wallonia it is the responsibility of AEQES, the agency for the Evaluation of the Quality of Higher Education of the Wallonia-Brussels Federation also known as the French Community of Belgium  to request and obtain this European reference certification. 12   circular reference  See also  edit  Regulation and licensure in engineering British professional qualifications European Chemist European professional qualification directives Professional Engineer References  edit   FEANI Member Countries . FEANI. .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Directive 8948EEC . European Union.  The EUR ING Title . FEANI.  Guide to the FEANI EUR ING register PDF . FEANI.  Hiring engineers from UK PDF . Canadian government.  Hiring engineers from France PDF . Canadian government.  Hiring engineers from Germany PDF . Canadian government.  Engineers Ireland - Chartered Engineer CEng MIEI . www.engineersireland.ie . Retrieved 2017-05-31 .  EUR ING Registration PDF . Engineering Council, UK.  Observations in Passports PDF . UK Government Page 7.  Ingnieur europen . IESF.  Ingnieur europen . CIBIC. External links  edit  FEANI.org EUR ING Professional Engineers group on LinkedIn EUR ING  FEANI group on Xing EUR ING professional registration - Engineering Council UK Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleEuropean_Engineer oldid910391946  Categories  Professional certification in engineering Hidden categories All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from August 2019