Ubiquitous computing From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search This article needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources   Ubiquitous computing     news    newspapers    books    scholar    JSTOR  June 2017   Learn how and when to remove this template message  Ubiquitous computing or  ubicomp  is a concept in software engineering and computer science where computing is made to appear anytime and everywhere. In contrast to desktop computing , ubiquitous computing can occur using any device, in any location, and in any format. A user interacts with the computer, which can exist in many different forms, including laptop computers , tablets and terminals in everyday objects such as a refrigerator or a pair of glasses . The underlying technologies to support ubiquitous computing include Internet , advanced middleware , operating system , mobile code , sensors , microprocessors , new IO and user interfaces, networks , mobile protocols, location and positioning, and new materials. This paradigm is also described as pervasive computing , 1  ambient intelligence , 2  or everyware. 3  Each term emphasizes slightly different aspects. When primarily concerning the objects involved, it is also known as physical computing , the Internet of Things , haptic computing , 4  and things that think. Rather than propose a single definition for ubiquitous computing and for these related terms, a taxonomy of properties for ubiquitous computing has been proposed, from which different kinds or flavors of ubiquitous systems and applications can be described. 5  Ubiquitous computing touches on distributed computing , mobile computing , location computing, mobile networking, sensor networks , humancomputer interaction , context-aware smart home technologies, and artificial intelligence . Contents 1 Core concepts 2 History 3 Recognizing the effects of extending processing power 4 Examples 5 Issues 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Core concepts  edit  This section contains close paraphrasing of a non-free copyrighted source, httpswww.researchgate.netpublication242615603_Ubiquitous_Computing_Environment_Threats_and_Defensive_Measures . Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Ideas in this article should be expressed in an original manner.  March 2019   Learn how and when to remove this template message  Ubiquitous computing is the concept of using small internet connected and inexpensive computers to help with everyday functions in an automated fashion. For example, a domestic ubiquitous computing environment might interconnect lighting and environmental controls with personal biometric monitors woven into clothing so that illumination and heating conditions in a room might be modulated, continuously and imperceptibly. Another common scenario posits refrigerators aware of their suitably tagged contents, able to both plan a variety of menus from the food actually on hand, and warn users of stale or spoiled food 6  . Ubiquitous computing presents challenges across computer science in systems design and engineering, in systems modelling, and in user interface design. Contemporary human-computer interaction models, whether command-line , menu-driven, or GUI -based, are inappropriate and inadequate to the ubiquitous case. This suggests that the natural interaction paradigm appropriate to a fully robust ubiquitous computing has yet to emerge  although there is also recognition in the field that in many ways we are already living in a ubicomp world see also the main article on natural user interfaces . Contemporary devices that lend some support to this latter idea include mobile phones , digital audio players , radio-frequency identification tags, GPS , and interactive whiteboards . Mark Weiser proposed three basic forms for ubiquitous computing devices 7   Tabs  a wearable device that is approximately a centimeter in size Pads  a hand-held device that is approximately a decimeter in size Boards  an interactive larger display device that is approximately a meter in size Ubiquitous computing devices proposed by Mark Weiser are all based around flat devices of different sizes with a visual display. 8  Expanding beyond those concepts there is a large array of other ubiquitous computing devices that could exist. Some of the additional forms that have been conceptualized are 5  Dust  miniaturized devices can be without visual output displays, e.g. micro electro-mechanical systems  MEMS , ranging from nanometres through micrometers to millimetres. See also Smart dust . Skin  fabrics based upon light emitting and conductive polymers, organic computer devices, can be formed into more flexible non-planar display surfaces and products such as clothes and curtains, see OLED display . MEMS device can also be painted onto various surfaces so that a variety of physical world structures can act as networked surfaces of MEMS. Clay  ensembles of MEMS can be formed into arbitrary three dimensional shapes as artefacts resembling many different kinds of physical object see also tangible interface . In Manuel Castells  book The Rise of the Network Society , Castells puts forth the concept that there is going to be a continuous evolution of computing devices. He states we will progress from stand-alone microcomputers and decentralized mainframes towards pervasive computing. Castells model of a pervasive computing system, uses the example of the Internet as the start of a pervasive computing system. The logical progression from t hat paradigm is a system where that networking logic becomes applicable in every realm of daily activity, in every location and every context. Castells envisages a system where billions of miniature, ubiquitous inter-communication devices will be spread worldwide, like pigment in the wall paint. Ubiquitous computing may be seen to consist of many layers, each with their own roles, which together form a single system Layer 1 Task management layer Monitors user task, context and index Map users task to need for the services in the environment To manage complex dependencies Layer 2 Environment management layer To monitor a resource and its capabilities To map service need, user level states of specific capabilities Layer 3 Environment layer To monitor a relevant resource To manage reliability of the resources History  edit  Mark Weiser coined the phrase ubiquitous computing around 1988, during his tenure as Chief Technologist of the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center PARC . Both alone and with PARC Director and Chief Scientist John Seely Brown , Weiser wrote some of the earliest papers on the subject, largely defining it and sketching out its major concerns. 7  9  10  Recognizing the effects of extending processing power  edit  Recognizing that the extension of processing power into everyday scenarios would necessitate understandings of social, cultural and psychological phenomena beyond its proper ambit, Weiser was influenced by many fields outside computer science, including  philosophy , phenomenology , anthropology , psychology , post-Modernism , sociology of science and feminist criticism . He was explicit about the humanistic origins of the invisible ideal in post-modernist thought, 10  referencing as well the ironically dystopian Philip K. Dick novel Ubik . Andy Hopper from Cambridge University UK proposed and demonstrated the concept of Teleporting  where applications follow the user wherever heshe moves. Roy Want, while a researcher and student working under Andy Hopper at Cambridge University, worked on the Active Badge System, which is an advanced location computing system where personal mobility that is merged with computing. Bill Schilit now at Google also did some earlier work in this topic, and participated in the early Mobile Computing workshop held in Santa Cruz in 1996. Ken Sakamura of the University of Tokyo , Japan leads the Ubiquitous Networking Laboratory UNL, Tokyo as well as the T-Engine Forum . The joint goal of Sakamuras Ubiquitous Networking specification and the T-Engine forum, is to enable any everyday device to broadcast and receive information. 11  12  MIT has also contributed significant research in this field, notably Things That Think consortium directed by Hiroshi Ishii , Joseph A. Paradiso and Rosalind Picard  at the Media Lab 13  and the CSAIL effort known as Project Oxygen . 14  Other major contributors include University of Washington s Ubicomp Lab directed by Shwetak Patel , Georgia Tech s College of Computing , Cornell University s People Aware Computing Lab , NYU s Interactive Telecommunications Program , UC Irvine s Department of Informatics, Microsoft Research , Intel Research and Equator, 15  Ajou University UCRi  CUS. 16  Examples  edit  One of the earliest ubiquitous systems was artist Natalie Jeremijenko s Live Wire, also known as Dangling String, installed at Xerox PARC during Mark Weisers time there. 17  This was a piece of string attached to a stepper motor and controlled by a LAN connection network activity caused the string to twitch, yielding a peripherally noticeable indication of traffic. Weiser called this an example of calm technology . 18  A present manifestation of this trend is the widespread diffusion of mobile phones. Many mobile phones support high speed data transmission, video services, and other services with powerful computational ability. Although these mobile devices are not necessarily manifestations of ubiquitous computing, there are examples, such as Japans Yaoyorozu Eight Million Gods Project in which mobile devices, coupled with radio frequency identification tags demonstrate that ubiquitous computing is already present in some form. 19  Ambient Devices has produced an orb, a dashboard, and a  weather beacon  these decorative devices receive data from a wireless network and report current events, such as stock prices and the weather, like the Nabaztag produced by Violet Snowden. The Australian futurist Mark Pesce has produced a highly configurable 52- LED LAMP enabled lamp which uses Wi-Fi named MooresCloud after Moores Law . 20  The Unified Computer Intelligence Corporation launched a device called Ubi  The Ubiquitous Computer designed to allow voice interaction with the home and provide constant access to information. 21  Ubiquitous computing research has focused on building an environment in which computers allow humans to focus attention on select aspects of the environment and operate in supervisory and policy-making roles. Ubiquitous computing emphasizes the creation of a human computer interface that can interpret and support a users intentions. For example, MITs Project Oxygen seeks to c reate a system in which computation is as pervasive as air In the future, computation will be human centered. It will be freely available everywhere, like batteries and power sockets, or oxygen in the air we breathe...We will not need to carry our own devices around with us. Instead, configurable generic devices, either handheld or embedded in the environment, will bring computation to us, whenever we need it and wherever we might be. As we interact with these anonymous devices, they will adopt our information personalities. They will respect our desires for privacy and security. We wont have to type, click, or learn new computer jargon. Instead, well communicate naturally, using speech and gestures that describe our intent... This is a fundamental transition that does not seek to escape the physical world and enter some metallic, gigabyte-infested cyberspace but rather brings computers and communications to us, making them synonymous with the useful tasks they perform. 19  Network robots link ubiquitous networks with robots , contributing to the creation of new lifestyles and solutions to address a variety of social problems including the aging of population and nursing care. 22  Issues  edit  Privacy is easily the most often-cited criticism of ubiquitous computing ubicomp, and may be the greatest barrier to its long-term success. 23  An article by Linda Little and Pam Briggs on this privacy issue states that .mw-parser-output .templatequoteoverflowhiddenmargin1em 0padding0 40px.mw-parser-output .templatequote .templatequoteciteline-height1.5emtext-alignleftpadding-left1.6emmargin-top0 These are the kinds of privacy principles that have been established by the industry  but over the past two years, we have been trying to understand whether such principles reflect the concerns of the ordinary citizen. Some of the key research questions we have been addressing are What are users key concerns regarding privacy management in a ubiquitous context and do they re flect expert privacy principles Do these concerns vary as a function of context Will users have enough confidence in privacy management procedures to hand-over management and administration of their privacy preferences Motahari, et al., 2007 argue people do not have a complete understanding of the threats to their privacy. While users of ubicomp systems are aware of inap propriate use of their personal information, legal obligations and inadequate security they are less aware of setting preferences for who has access and any social inferences that can be made by observations by other people. They further argue a holistic approach is needed as traditional approaches and current investigations are not enough to address privacy threats in ubiquito us computing. Recognising  in line with a number of other researchers Harper  Singleton, 2001 Paine, et al., 2007  that privacy concerns are likely to be highly situation-dependent, we have developed a method of enquiry which displays a rich context to the user in order to elicit more detailed information about those privacy factors that underpin our acceptance of ubiquitous computing. 24  Public policy problems are often preceded by long shadows, long trains of activity, emerging slowly, over decades or even the course of a century. There is a need for a long-term view to guide policy decision making, as this will assist in identifying long-term problems or opportunities related to the ubiquitous computing environment. This information can reduce uncertainty a nd guide the decisions of both policy makers and those directly involved in system development Wedemeyer et al. 2001. One important consideration is the degree to which different opinions form around a single problem. Some issues may have strong consensus about their importance, even if there are great differences in opinion regarding the cause or solution. For example, few p eople will differ in their assessment of a highly tangible problem with physical impact such as terrorists using new weapons of mass destruction to destroy human life. The problem statements outlined above that address the future evolution of the human species or challenges to identity have clear cultural or religious implications and are likely to have greater variance in opin ion about them. 19  See also  edit  Ambient intelligence Ambient media Augmented reality Computer accessibility Context-aware pervasive systems Four-dimensional product High availability Human-centered computing List of ubiquitous computing research centers Mobile interaction Pervasive game Pervasive informatics Responsive computer-aided design Sensor grid Smart, connected products Sentient computing Smart city ubiquitous city System on chip Task computing Transreality gaming Ubiquitous commerce Ubiquitous learning Ubiquitous robot Urban computing Urban informatics User experience Virtual reality Wearable computer References  edit   Nieuwdorp, E. 2007. The pervasive discourse. Computers in Entertainment . 5 2 13. doi  10.11451279540.1279553 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Hansmann, Uwe 2003. Pervasive Computing The Mobile World . Springer. ISBN   9783540002185 .  Greenfield, Adam 2006. Everyware The Dawning Age of Ubiquitous Computing . New Riders. pp.  1112. ISBN   9780321384010 .  World Haptics Conferences . Haptics Technical Committee. Archived from the original on 16 November 2011. Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   a b Poslad, Stefan 2009. Ubiquitous Computing Smart Devices, Smart Environments and Smart Interaction PDF . Wiley. ISBN   978-0-470-03560-3 .  PDF Ubiquitous Computing Environment Threats and Defensive Measures . ResearchGate . Retrieved 2019-03-22 .  a b Weiser, Mark 1991. The Computer for the 21st Century . Archived from the original on 22 October 2014. Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   Weiser, Mark March 23, 1993. Some Computer Science Issues in Ubiquitous Computing . CACM . Retrieved May 28, 2019 .  Weiser, M. Gold, R. Brown, J.S. 1999-05-11. Ubiquitous computing . Archived from the original on 10 March 2009. Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   a b Weiser, Mark 17 March 1996. Ubiquitous computing . Archived from the original on 2 June 2018. Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   Krikke, J 2005. IEEE Xplore Abstract  T-Engine Japans ubiquitous computing architecture is ready for prime time . IEEE Pervasive Computing . 4 2 49. doi  10.1109MPRV.2005.40 . Retrieved 2015-10-13 .  T-Engine Forum Summary . T-engine.org. Archived from the original on 21 October 2018 . Retrieved 25 August 2011 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   MIT Media Lab  Things That Think Consortium . MIT . Retrieved 2007-11-03 .  MIT Project Oxygen Overview . MIT . Retrieved 2007-11-03 .  Equator . UCL . Retrieved 2009-11-19 .  Center of excellence for Ubiquitous System in Korean. CUS. Archived from the original on 2 October 2011. Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   dead link   Weiser, Mark. Designing Calm Technology . Retrieved May 27, 2019 .  Weiser, Mark  Gold, Rich Brown, John Seely 1999. The Origins of Ubiquitous Computing Research at PARC in the Late 1980s. IBM Systems Journal . 38 4 693. doi  10.1147sj.384.0693 .  a b c Winter, Jenifer December 2008. Emerging Policy Problems Related to Ubiquitous Computing Negotiating Stakeholders Visions of the Future. Knowledge, Technology  Policy . 21 4 191203. doi  10.1007s12130-008-9058-4 .  Fingas, Jon 13 October 2012. MooresCloud Light runs Linux, puts LAMP on your lamp video . Engadget.com . Retrieved 22 March 2019 .  Ubi Cloud . Theubi.com. Archived from the original on 2 January 2015. Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   Network Robot Forum . Archived from the original on October 24, 2007. Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   Hong, Jason 2005. An architecture for privacy-sensitive ubiquitous computing 310. Cite journal requires journal  help   Little, Linda Briggs, Pam 2009. Privacy Factors for Successful Ubiquitous Computing. International Journal of E-Business Research . 5 2 20. Further reading  edit  Adam Greenfield s book Everyware The Dawning Age of Ubiquitous Computing  ISBN   0-321-38401-6 . John Tinnells book Actionable Media Digital Communication Beyond the Desktop Oxford University Press, 2018. ISBN   0190678089 External links  edit  International Conference on Pervasive Computing Pervasive Pervasive and Mobile Computing journal, PMC Elsevier Proceedings of the Semantic Ambient Media Workshop Series iAMEA v t e Computer science Note This template roughly follows the 2012 ACM Computing Classification System . Hardware Printed circuit board Peripheral Integrated circuit Very Large Scale Integration Systems on Chip SoCs Energy consumption Green computing Electronic design automation Hardware acceleration Computer systems organization Computer architecture Embedded system Real-time computing Dependability Networks Network architecture Network protocol Network components Network scheduler Network performance evaluation Network service Software organization Interpreter Middleware Virtual machine Operating system Software quality Software notations and tools Programming paradigm Programming language Compiler Domain-specific language Modeling language Software framework Integrated development environment Software configuration management Software library Software repository Software development Software development process Requirements analysis Software design Software construction Software deployment Software maintenance Programming team Open-source model Theory of computation Model of computation Formal language Automata theory Computational complexity theory Logic Semantics Algorithms Algorithm design Analysis of algorithms Algorithmic efficiency Randomized algorithm Computational geometry Mathematics of computing Discrete mathematics Probability Statistics Mathematical software Information theory Mathematical analysis Numerical analysis Information systems Database management system Information storage systems Enterprise information system Social information systems Geographic information system Decision support system Process control system Multimedia information system Data mining Digital library Computing platform Digital marketing World Wide Web Information retrieval Security Cryptography Formal methods Security services Intrusion detection system Hardware security Network security Information security Application security Humancomputer interaction Interaction design Social computing Ubiquitous computing Visualization Accessibility Concurrency Concurrent computing Parallel computing Distributed computing Multithreading Multiprocessing Artificial intelligence Natural language processing Knowledge representation and reasoning Computer vision Automated planning and scheduling Search methodology Control method Philosophy of artificial intelligence Distributed artificial intelligence Machine learning Supervised learning Unsupervised learning Reinforcement learning Multi-task learning Cross-validation Graphics Animation Rendering Image manipulation Graphics processing unit Mixed reality Virtual reality Image compression Solid modeling Applied computing E-commerce Enterprise software Computational mathematics Computational physics Computational chemistry Computational biology Computational social science Computational engineering Computational healthcare Digital art Electronic publishing Cyberwarfare Electronic voting Video games Word processing Operations research Educational technology Document management Book Category Portal Outline WikiProject Commons v t e Mixed and virtual reality Concepts Applications of virtual reality Artificial reality Augmented reality Augmented virtuality Immersion Projection augmented model Real life Realityvirtuality continuum Telepresence Virtual reality sickness Virtual world persistent Technology Haptic suit Omnidirectional treadmill Wearable computer Display Head-mounted display optical Head-up display Virtual retinal display Virtual reality headset Software Asynchronous reprojection Image-based modeling and rendering Photography Free viewpoint television 360-degree video VR photography Omnidirectional camera Peripherals Oculus Touch Leap Motion PlayStation Move Wired glove Immersive devices Current Google Cardboard Google Daydream HTC Vive Nintendo Labo VR Kit Oculus Go Oculus Quest Oculus Rift CV1 S OSVR Magic Leap Samsung Gear VR PlayStation VR Pimax Valve Index Windows Mixed Reality Microsoft HoloLens 2 Google Glass Legacy Famicom 3D System Sensorama Sega VR Sword of Damocles Virtual Boy Virtuality Applications ARToolKit ARCore Interactive art Virtual graffiti OpenXR Pervasive game v t e Ambient intelligence Concepts Context awareness Internet of things Object hyperlinking Profiling Spime Supranet Ubiquitous computing Web of Things Wireless sensor networks Technologies 6LoWPAN ANT DASH7 IEEE 802.15.4 Internet 0 Machine to machine Radio-frequency identification Smartdust XBee Platforms Arduino Contiki Electric Imp Gadgeteer ioBridge Netduino Raspberry Pi TinyOS Wiring Xively NodeMCU Applications Ambient device CeNSE Connected car Home automation HomeOS Internet refrigerator Nabaztag Smart city Smart TV Smarter Planet Pioneers Kevin Ashton Gaetano Borriello Adam Dunkels Stefano Marzano Don Norman Roel Pieper Josef Preishuber-Pflgl John Seely Brown Bruce Sterling Mark Weiser Other Ambient Devices AmbieSense Ebbits project IPSO Alliance Authority control BNE  XX545920 BNF  cb146048227 data GND  4657367-7 LCCN  sh2002000759 NDL  01003351 SUDOC  083817581 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleUbiquitous_computing oldid912151625  Categories  Ubiquitous computing Hidden categories CS1 errors deprecated parameters CS1 Korean-language sources ko All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from May 2019 CS1 errors missing periodical Articles needing additional references from June 2017 All articles needing additional references Articles needing cleanup from March 2019 All pages needing cleanup Articles with close paraphrasing from March 2019 All articles with close paraphrasing Wikipedia articles with BNE identifiers Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers Wikipedia articles with SUDOC identifiers