ITIL From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search This article may be too long to read and navigate comfortably . The readable prose size is 81 kilobytes. Please consider splitting content into sub-articles, condensing it, or adding subheadings .  June 2019  ITIL , formerly 1  an acronym for Information Technology Infrastructure Library , is a set of detailed practices for IT service management ITSM that focuses on aligning IT services with the needs of business. ITIL describes processes, procedures, tasks, and checklists which are not organization-specific nor technology-specific, but can be applied by an organization towards strategy, delivering value, and maintaining a minimum level of competency. It allows the organization to establish a baseline from which it can plan, implement, and measure. It is used to demonstrate compliance and to measure improvement. There is no formal independent third party compliance assessment available for ITIL compliance in an organization. Certification in ITIL is only available to individuals. Since 2013, ITIL has been owned by AXELOS , a joint venture between Capita and the UK Cabinet Office 2  . AXELOS licenses organizations to use the ITIL intellectual property, accredits licensed examination institutes, and manages updates to the framework. Organizations that wish to implement ITIL internally do not require this license. The ITIL 4 Foundation Book was released February 18th 2019 3  . In its former version known as ITIL 2011, ITIL is published as a series of five core volumes, each of which covers a different ITSM lifecycle stage. Although ITIL underpins ISOIEC 20000 previously BS 15000, the International Service Management Standard for IT service management, there are some differences between the ISO 20000 standard, ICT Standard by IFGICT and the ITIL framework. Contents 1 History 2 ITIL 4 Edition 2.1 ITIL service value system 2.1.1 ITIL service value chain 2.1.2 ITIL practices 2.1.3 ITIL guiding principles 2.1.4 Governance 2.1.5 Continual improvement 2.2 Four dimension model 2.2.1 Organizations and people 2.2.2 Information and technology products 2.2.3 Partners and suppliers 2.2.4 Value streams and processes 2.3 ITIL Practices 2.3.1 General management practices 2.3.2 Service management practices 2.3.3 Technical management practices 3 ITIL 2007 edition 3.1 Overview of ITIL 2007 edition 3.1.1 Changes and characteristics of the 2011 edition of ITIL 3.2 Service strategy 3.2.1 Strategy Management for IT Services 3.2.2 Service Portfolio Management 3.2.3 Financial management for IT services 3.3 Service design 3.3.1 Service catalogue management 3.3.2 Service-level management 3.3.3 Availability management 3.3.4 Capacity management 3.3.5 IT service continuity management 3.3.6 Security management 3.3.7 Supplier management 3.4 Service transition 3.4.1 Change management 3.4.2 Service asset and configuration management 3.4.3 Release and deployment management 3.5 Service operation 3.5.1 Processes 3.5.2 Functions 3.5.2.1 Service desk 3.5.2.2 Application management 3.5.2.3 IT Operations management 3.5.2.4 Technical management 3.5.3 Event management 3.5.4 Incident management 3.5.5 Request fulfilment 3.5.6 Problem management 3.5.6.1 Root-cause analysis 3.5.7 Identity management 3.6 Continual service improvement CSI 4 ITIL Version 2 4.1 Overview of ITIL Version 2 4.2 Service support 4.3 Service delivery 4.4 ICT infrastructure management 4.4.1 ICT design and planning 4.4.2 ICT deployment management 4.4.3 ICT operations management 4.4.4 ICT technical support 4.5 Planning to implement service management 4.6 Small-scale implementation 5 Related frameworks 5.1 Descendants 5.1.1 Microsoft Operations Framework 5.1.2 FITS 5.2 Other frameworks 6 Certification 6.1 ITIL 4 6.2 Individuals 6.3 Pins 6.4 Organizations 7 Criticism 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References 11 External links History  edit  Responding to growing dependence on IT, the UK Governments Central Computer and Telecommunications Agency CCTA in the 1980s developed a set of recommendations. It recognized that, without standard practices, government agencies and private sector contracts had started independently creating their own IT management practices. The IT Infrastructure Library originated as a collection of books, each covering a specific practice within IT service management . ITIL was built around a process model-based view of controlling and managing operations often credited to W. Edwards Deming and his plan-do-check-act PDCA cycle. 4  After the initial publication in 198996, the number of books quickly grew within ITIL Version 1 to more than 30 volumes. In 20002001, to make ITIL more accessible and affordable, ITIL Version 2 consolidated the publications into nine logical sets that grouped related process-guidelines to match different aspects of IT management, applications and services. The Service Management sets Service Support and Service Delivery were by far the most widely used, circulated, and understood of the I TIL Version 2 publications.  citation needed  In April 2001, the CCTA was merged into the OGC , an office of the UK Treasury . 5  In 2006, the ITIL Version 2 glossary was published. In May 2007, this organization issued ITIL Version 3 also known as the ITIL Refresh Project consisting of 26 processes and functions, now grouped into only 5 volumes, arranged around the concept of Service lifecycle structure. ITIL Version 3 is now known as ITIL 2007 Edition. In 2009, the OGC officially announced that ITIL Version 2 certification would be withdrawn and launched a major consultation as per how to proceed. 6  In July 2011, the 2011 edition of ITIL was published, providing an update to the version published in 2007. The OGC is no longer listed as the owner of ITIL, following the consolidation of OGC into the Cabinet Office . The ITIL 4 Edition starts with the ITIL Foundation book, which was released on February 18th 2019. ITIL 4 Edition  edit  The ITIL Foundation book of the ITIL 4 Edition introduces some new concepts and evolves existing knowledge. There are two key components of the ITIL 4 framework ITIL service value system SVS 7  Four dimensions model ITIL service value system  edit  ITIL 4 Edition defines as first key component the service value system SVS. ITIL named five core components of the ITIL SVS 8   ITIL service value chain  edit  The service value chain provides an operation model with six activities 9   Plan Improve Engage Design and transition ObtainBuild Deliver and support. ITIL practices  edit  The well known ITIL processes are now named as practices 10  . They are grouped as 14 general management practices, 17 service management practices, and three technical management practices. ITIL guiding principles  edit  These are the core messages of ITIL 4 and of service management in general and are seen in many other frameworks, standards and methods such as Lean, Agile, DevOps, COBIT, PRINCE2 and more 11  . Focus on value - Generate value directly or indirectly. Start where you are - Preserve good capabilities and improve where needed. Progress iteratively with feedback - Improve often in small steps and measure your way forward. Collaborate and promote visibility - Transparent work in the teams, with the stakeholders and partners. Think and work holistically - Its an End-to-End responsibility  the service and the SVS. Keep it simple and practical - The right size and use of processes, tools, resources matters. Optimize and automate - Manual work is a bug. Reserve human intervention only for really needed activities. Governance  edit  The system, which direct and control the organization 12  . Continual improvement  edit  In the ITIL SVS are three levels of continual improvement 13   the ITIL continual improvement model, which is well known from the previous versions of ITIL. What is the vision Where are we now Where do we want to be How do we get there Take action Did we get there How do we keep the momentum going the improve service value chain activity, which is introduced there see above the continual improvement practice, which covers the day-to-day activities and is described with the other ITIL practices see above Four dimension model  edit  The second key component in ITIL 4 Edition is the four dimension model 14  . The four dimensions reflect the former 4 Ps of ITIL  people, products, partners, processes. Each component of the SVS should consider these four dimensions, which are Organizations and people  edit  People are key in this dimension and every person should have a clear understanding of their contribution in the SVS. The organization covers as well as formal structure, culture and the fitting level of capacity and competence 15  . Information and technology products  edit  This is the information managed in the service and any supporting information and knowledge including protect, manage and archive it. Technology is main driver for benefit in service management. This may be artificial intelligence, machine learning, the use of mobile platforms, cloud solutions, collaboration tools, automated testing and operations as well as continuous integrat ion  continuous development  continuous deployment solutions 16  . Partners and suppliers  edit  Every service provider uses other organizations to create their own value. The strategy for the decisions about the use of others is influenced by their own strategy focus, corporate culture, resource scarcity, cost concerns, subject matter expertise, external constraints, and demand patterns 17  . Value streams and processes  edit  Value streams are a series of steps, which create value as products or services. Each product or service in an organization shall be a definition of the value stream. Processes transform with a set of activities input and output. The processes underpin the value streams. There are political, economic, social, technological, legal, and environmental factors, which influence a service provider 18  . ITIL Practices  edit  The well known ITIL processes are now named as 34 practices. Theyre part of the ITIL SVS. Each practice is in relation with the six activities of the ITIL service value chain plan, improve, engage, design and transition, obtain build as well as deliver and support. General management practices  edit  The 14 practices without a service management specific focus are named general management practices 19  . Strategy management Portfolio management Architecture management Service financial management Workforce and talent management Continual improvement - The operational, day-to-day part of continual improvement along with the strategic view and the improvement of the service value chain. Measurement and reporting Risk management - A link to ISO 310002018 Risk Management as a summary to have a step in. Information security management Knowledge management Organizational change management Project management Relationship management Supplier management Service management practices  edit  ITIL 4 Edition names 17 service management specific practices 20   Business analysis Service catalogue management Service design Service level management Availability management Capacity and performance management Service continuity management Monitoring and event management Service desk Incident management Service request management - Includes both Request Fulfilment and Access Management of ITIL V3 Problem management Release management - Includes an explanation about releases in waterfall driven environments and DevOps driven organizations. Change control - Formerly known as change management. Service validation and testing Service configuration management IT asset management Technical management practices  edit  The three technical management practices are 21   Deployment management - In alignment with release management and change control for the administrative activities deployment management carries out all real doing on systems and clouds. Including a list of different approaches of deployment. Infrastructure and platform management - It comes with a wide alignment for cloud computing. Software development and management ITIL 2007 edition  edit  Overview of ITIL 2007 edition  edit  ITIL 2007 edition previously known as ITIL Version 3 is an extension of ITIL Version 2 and fully replaced it following the completion of the withdrawal period on 30 June 2011. 22  ITIL 2007 provides a more holistic perspective on the full life cycle of services, covering the entire IT organization and all supporting components needed to deliver services to the customer, whereas ITIL Version 2 focused on specific activities directly related to service delivery and support. Most of the ITIL Version 2 activities remained untouched in 2007, but some signif icant changes in terminology were introduced in order to facilitate the expansion. Changes and characteristics of the 2011 edition of ITIL  edit  A summary of changes has been published by the UK Government. In line with the 2007 edition, the 2011 edition consists of five core publications  Service Strategy , Service Design , Service Transition , Service Operation , and Continual Service Improvement . ITIL 2011 is an update to the ITIL framework that addresses significant additional guidance with the definition of formal processes which were previously implied but not identified, as well as correction of errors and inconsistencies. Twenty-six processes are listed in ITIL 2011 edition and described below, along with which core publication provides the main content for each process. ITIL 2007 has five volumes, published in May 2007, and updated in July 2011 as ITIL 2011 for consistency ITIL Service Strategy understands organizational objectives and customer needs. 23  ITIL Service Design turns the service strategy into a plan for delivering the business objectives. 24  ITIL Service Transition develops and improves capabilities for introducing new services into supported environments. 25  ITIL Service Operation manages services in supported environments. 26  ITIL Continual Service Improvement achieves services incremental and large-scale improvements. 27  Due to the similarity between ITIL Version 3 of the year 2007 and ITIL of the year 2011, no bridge examinations for ITIL Version 3 certification holders were created or made available for ITIL 2011 certification. Service strategy  edit  The centre and origin point of the ITIL Service Lifecycle, the ITIL Service Strategy SS volume, 23  provides guidance on clarification and prioritization of service-provider investments in services. More generally, Service Strategy focuses on helping IT organizations improve and develop over the long term. In both cases, Service Strategy relies largely upon a market-driven approach. The Service Strategy lifecycle stage is often considered as the core of the service lifecyc le. In the Service Strategy stage, the strategic approach for the whole lifecycle is identified to provide values to the customers through IT service management . Key topics covered include service value definition, business-case development, service assets, market analysis, and service provider types. List of covered processes Strategy management for IT Services Service portfolio management Financial management for IT services Demand management Business relationship management For candidates in the ITIL Intermediate Capability stream, the Service Offerings and Agreements SOA Qualification course and exam are most closely aligned to the Service Strategy SS Qualification course and exam in the Lifecycle stream. Strategy Management for IT Services  edit  The objective of Strategy Management for IT Services is to assess the service providers offerings, capabilities, competitors as well as current and potential market spaces in order to develop a strategy to serve customers. Once the strategy has been defined, this ITIL process is also responsible for ensuring the implementation of the strategy. 28  Service Portfolio Management  edit  The customer needs services to achieve business outcomes. The service portfolio management process ensures that services enable the accomplishment of strategic goals and objectives as well as tracks the cost and the value of each investment in a service throughout its lifecycle to ensure that it produces its desired returns. The purpose of Service Portfolio Management is ensuri ng the service offerings are defined and meet the requirements of the customers. The service portfolio contains information about the performance of investments in services the service provider manages on behalf of the business. The service portfolio comprises the pipeline section, which contains the services that are yet to be offered the service catalogue section, which contains the details of operational services and the retired section, which contains details of the services that are no longer offered. Financial management for IT services  edit  Main article Financial management for IT services IT Financial Management comprises the discipline of ensuring the IT infrastructure is obtained at the most effective price which does not necessarily mean cheapest and calculating the cost of providing IT services so an organization can understand the costs of its IT services. These costs may then be recovered from the customer of the service. This is the second component of the service delivery process. Service design  edit  The Service Design SD volume 24  provides good-practice guidance on the design of IT services, processes, and other aspects of the service management effort. Significantly, design within ITIL is understood to encompass all elements relevant to technology service delivery, rather than focusing solely on design of the technology itself. As such, service design addresses how a planned service solution interacts with the larger business and technical environments, service management systems required to support the service, processes which interact with the service, technology, and architecture required to support the service, and the supply chain required to support the planned service. Within ITIL, design work for an IT service is aggregated into a single Service Design Package  SDP . Service design packages, along with other information about services, are managed within the service catalogues. List of covered processes Design coordination Service catalogue management Service-level management Availability management Capacity management IT service continuity management Security management Supplier management A model used to help define roles and responsibilities in service design is a RACI matrix Responsible, Accountable, Consulted and Informed. Service catalogue management  edit  Service catalogue management maintains and produces the service catalogue and ensures that it contains accurate details, dependencies and interfaces of all services made available to customers. Service catalogue information includes ordering and requesting processes prices deliverables contact points Service-level management  edit  Service-level management provides for continual identification, monitoring and review of the levels of IT services specified in the service-level agreements SLAs. Service-level management ensures that arrangements are in place with internal IT support-providers and external suppliers in the form of operational level agreements OLAs and underpinning contracts UCs, respectively. The process involves assessing the impact of change on service quality and SLAs. The service-level management process is in close relation with the operational processes to control their activities. The central role of service-level management makes it the natural place for metrics to be established and monitored against a benchmark . Service-level management is the primary interface with the customer as opposed to the user serviced by the service desk . Service-level management is responsible for ensuring that the agreed IT services are delivered when and where they are supposed to be liaising with availability management , capacity management , incident management and problem management to ensure that the required levels and quality of service are achieved within the resources agreed with financial management  ensuring that appropriate IT service continuity plans exist to support the business and its continuity requirements. The service-level manager relies on the other areas of the service delivery process to provide the necessary support which ensures the agreed services are provided in a cost-effective, secure and efficient manner. Availability management  edit  Availability management allows organizations to sustain IT service-availability in order to support the business at a justifiable cost. High-level activities are realizing availability requirements, compiling availability plans, monitoring availability, and monitoring maintenance obligations. Availability management addresses the ability of an IT component to perform at an agreed level over a period of time. Reliability Ability of an IT component to perform at an agreed level at described conditions. Maintainability The ability of an IT component to remain in, or be restored to an operational state. Serviceability  The ability for an external supplier to maintain the availability of component or function under a third-party contract. Resilience A measure of freedom from operational failure and a method of keeping services reliable. One popular method of resilience is redundancy. Security  A service may have associated data. Security refers to the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of that data. Availability gives a clear overview of the end-to-end availability of the system. Capacity management  edit  Capacity management supports the optimum and cost-effective provision of IT services by helping organizations match their IT resources to business demands. The high-level activities include application sizing workload management demand management modelling capacity planning resource management performance management Capacity management is focused on strategic capacity, including capacity of personnel e.g., human resources, staffing and training, system capacity, and component or tactical capacity. IT service continuity management  edit  IT service continuity management ITSCM covers the processes by which plans are put in place and managed to ensure that IT services can recover and continue even after a serious incident occurs. It is not just about reactive measures, but also about proactive measures  reducing the risk of a disaster in the first instance. ITSM is regarded by the application owners as the recovery of the IT infrastructure used to deliver IT services, but as of 2009 update  many businesses practice the much further-reaching process of business continuity planning  BCP , to ensure that the whole end-to-end business process can continue should a serious incident occur at primary support level. ITSCM involves the following basic steps prioritizing the activities to be recovered by conducting a business impact analysis BIA performing a risk assessment aka risk analysis  for each of the IT services to identify the assets, threats, vulnerabilities and countermeasures for each service. evaluating the options for recovery producing the contingency plan testing, reviewing, and revising the plan on a regular basis. Security management  edit  Main article ITIL security management The ITIL-process Security Management 29  describes the structured fitting of information security in the management organization. It is based on the code of practice for information security management system ISMS now known as ISOIEC 27001 . A basic goal of security management is to ensure adequate information security . The primary goal of information security, in turn, is to protect information assets against risks , and thus to maintain their value to the organization. This is commonly expressed in terms of ensuring their confidentiality , integrity and availability , along with related properties or goals such as authenticity , accountability , non-repudiation and reliability. Mounting pressure for many organizations to structure their information security management systems in accordance with ISOIEC 27001 requires revision of the ITIL Version 2 security management volume, which culminated in the release of the 2007 edition. Supplier management  edit  The purpose of supplier management is to obtain value for money from suppliers and contracts. It ensures that underpinning contracts and agreements align with business needs, Service Level Agreements and Service Level Requirements . Supplier Management oversees process of identification of business needs, evaluation of suppliers, establishing contracts, their categorization, management and termination. Service transition  edit  Service transition ST, as described by the ITIL service transition volume, 25  relates to the delivery of services required by a business into liveoperational use, and often encompasses the project side of IT rather than business as usual BAU. This area also covers topics such as managing changes to the BAU environment. List of ITIL processes in service transition Transition planning and support Change management Service asset and configuration management Release and deployment management Service validation and testing Change evaluation Knowledge management Change management  edit  Main article Change management ITSM Change management aims to ensure that standardised methods and procedures are used for efficient handling of all changes. A change is an event that results in a new status of one or more configuration items CIs, and which is approved by management, is cost-effective, enhances business process changes fixes  all with a minimum risk to IT infrastructure. The main aims of change management include Minimal disruption of services Reduction in back-out activities Economic use of resources involved in the change Common change management terminology includes Change  the addition, modification or removal of CIs Request For Change  RFC  or, in older terminology, Change Request  CR  a form used to record details of a request for a change and is sent as an input to Change Management by the Change Requestor ITIL Version 2 - Forward Schedule of Changes FSC  schedule that contains details of all forthcoming Changes. ITIL 2007 - Change Schedule CS  schedule that contains details of all forthcoming Changes, and references historical data. Many people still refer to the known term FSC. There are three types of changes Standard Change, Normal Change, UrgentEmergency Change Service asset and configuration management  edit  Service asset and configuration management is primarily focused on maintaining information i.e., configurations about Configuration Items i.e., assets required to deliver an IT service, including their relationships. Configuration management is the management and traceability of every aspect of a configuration from beginning to end and it includes the following key process areas under its umbrella Identification Planning Change control Change management Release management Maintenance Release and deployment management  edit  Release and deployment management is used by the software migration team for platform-independent and automated distribution of software and hardware, including license controls across the entire IT infrastructure. Proper software and hardware control ensures the availability of licensed, tested, and version-certified software and hardware, which functions as intended when introduced into existing infrastructu re. Quality control during the development and implementation of new hardware and software is also the responsibility of Release Management. This guarantees that all software meets the demands of the business processes. Release management utilizes Definitive Media Library for storage of software. The goals of release management include Planning the rollout of software Designing and implementing procedures for the distribution and installation of changes to IT systems Effectively communicating and managing expectations of the customer during the planning and rollout of new releases Controlling the distribution and installation of changes to IT systems Release management focuses on the protection of the live environment and its services through the use of formal procedures and checks. A Release consists of the new or changed software andor hardware required to implement approved changes. Release categories include Major software releases and major hardware upgrades, normally containing large amounts of new functionality, some of which may make intervening fixes to problems redundant. A major upgrade or release usually supersedes all preceding minor upgrades, releases and emergency fixes. Minor software releases and hardware upgrades, normally containing small enhancements and fixes, some of which may have already been issued as emergency fixes. A minor upgrade or release usually supersedes all preceding emergency fixes. Emergency software and hardware fixes, normally containing the corrections to a small number of known problems. Releases can be divided based on the release unit into Delta release a release of only that part of the software which has been changed. For example, security patches. Full release the entire software program is deployedfor example, a new version of an existing application. Packaged release a combination of many changesfor example, an operating system image which also contains specific applications. Service operation  edit  Service Operation SO aims to provide best practice for achieving the delivery of agreed levels of services both to end-users and the customers where customers refer to those individuals who pay for the service and negotiate the SLAs . Service operation, as described in the ITIL Service Operation volume, 26  is the part of the lifecycle where the services and value is actually directly delivered. Also the monitoring of problems and balance between service reliability and cost etc. are considered. The functions include technical management, application management, operations management and service desk as well as, responsibilities for staff engaging in Service Operation. Processes  edit  Event Management Access Management Request Fulfilment Problem Management Incident Management Functions  edit  Service Desk Technical Management Application Management IT Operations Management Service desk  edit  The service desk is one of four ITIL functions and is primarily associated with the Service Operation lifecycle stage. Tasks include handling incidents and requests, and providing an interface for other ITSM processes. Features include single point of contact SPOC and not necessarily the first point of contact FPOC single point of entry single point of exit easier for customers streamlined communication channel Primary purposes of a service desk include incident control life-cycle management of all service requests communication keeping a customer informed of progress and advising on workarounds The service desk function can have various names, such as main emphasis on professionally handling large call volumes of telephone-based transactions Help desk  manage, co-ordinate and resolve incidents as quickly as possible at primary support level Service desk  not only handles incidents, problems and questions but also provides an interface for other activities such as change requests, maintenance contracts, software licenses, service-level management, configuration management, availability management, financial management and IT services continuity management The three types of structure for consideration Local service desk  to meet local business needs Central service desk  for organizations having multiple locations Virtual service desk  for organizations having multi-country locations Application management  edit  ITIL application management 30  encompasses a set of best practices proposed to improve the overall quality of IT software development and support through the life-cycle of software development projects, with particular attention to gathering and defining requirements that meet business objectives. Software asset management SAM is a primary topic of ITIL Version 2 and is closely associated with the ITIL Application Management function. SAM is the practice of integrating people, processes, and technology to allow software licenses and usage to be systematically tracked, evaluated, and managed. The goal of SAM is to reduce IT expenditures, human resource overhead and risks inherent in owning and managing software assets. SAM practices include maintaining software license compliance tracking inventory and software asset use maintaining standard policies and procedures surrounding definition, deployment, configuration, use, and retirement of software assets and the definitive software library . SAM represents the software component of IT asset management. This includes hardware asset management because effective hardware inventory controls are critical to efforts to control software. This means overseeing software and hardware that constitute an organizations computers and network . IT Operations management  edit  Main article ICT infrastructure management IT operations primarily work from documented processes and procedures and should be concerned with a number of, specific sub-processes, such as output management, job scheduling, backup and restore, network monitoringmanagement, system monitoringmanagement, database monitoringmanagement, storage monitoringmanagement, etc. Technical management  edit  Main article ICT infrastructure management Event management  edit  Main article Event Management ITIL An event may indicate that something is not functioning correctly, leading to an incident being logged. Events may also indicate normal activity, or a need for routine intervention such as changing a tape. Event management depends on monitoring, but it is different. Event management generates and detects notifications, while monitoring checks the status of components even when no events are occurring. Events may be detected by a CI sending a message, or by a management tool polling the CI. After an event has been detected it may lead to an Incident, Problem or Change, or it may simply be logged in case the information is needed. Response to an event may be automated or may require manual intervention. If actions are needed then a trigger, such as an SMS message or an incident being automatically logged, can alert support staff. Incident management  edit  Main article Incident management ITSM Incident management aims to restore normal service operation as quickly as possible and minimize the adverse effect on business operations, thus ensuring that the best possible levels of service quality and availability are maintained. Normal service operation is defined here as service operation within service-level agreement  SLA  limits. An incident is defined as 2007 An unplanned interruption to an IT service or a reduction in the quality of an IT service. Failure of a configuration item that has not yet impacted service is also an incident. For example, failure of one disk from a mirror set. ITIL Version 2 An event which is not part of the standard operation of a service and which causes or may cause disruption to or a reduction in the quality of services and customer productivity. The objective of incident management is to restore normal operations as quickly as possible with the least possible impact on either the business or the user, at a cost-effective price. The transformation between event-to-incident is the critical junction where Application Performance Management APM and ITIL come together to provide tangible value back to the business. 31  Request fulfilment  edit  Request fulfilment or request management focuses on fulfilling Service Requests, which are often minor standard changes e.g., requests to change a password or requests for information. The term standard change means pre-approved, repeatable, pre-defined, low risk changes. If the change does not meet these criteria then it is not a standard change and should be defined as a request for change. Problem management  edit  Main article Problem management Problem management aims to resolve the root causes of incidents and thus to minimize the adverse impact of incidents caused by errors within the IT infrastructure, and to prevent recurrence of incidents related to these errors. A problem in this context is the unknown underlying cause of one or more incidents, and a known error is a problem that is successfully diagnosed an d for which either a work-around or a permanent resolution has been identified. The CCTA Central Computer and Telecommunications Agency defines problems and known errors as follows A problem is a condition often identified as a result of multiple incidents that exhibit common symptoms. Problems can also be identified from a single significant incident, indicative of a single error, for which the cause is unknown, but for which the impact is significant. A known error is a condition identified by successful diagnosis of the root cause of a problem, and the subsequent development of a work-around. Problem management differs from incident management . Problem management aims primarily to find and resolve the root cause of a problem and thus prevent further incidents the purpose of incident management is to return the service to normal level as soon as possible, with smallest possible business impact. The problem-management process reduces the number and severity of incidents and problems on the business, and documents the details of the problem and resolution to be available for the first-line and second-line of the help desk. The proactive process identifies and resolves problems before incidents occur. Such processes include Trend analysis Targeting support action Providing information to the organization The error control process iteratively diagnoses known errors until they are eliminated by the successful implementation of a change under the control of the Change Management process. The problem control process aims to handle problems in an efficient way. Problem control identifies the root cause of incidents and reports it to the service desk. Other activities are Problem identification and recording Problem classification Problem investigation and diagnosis Root-cause analysis  edit  Root-cause analysis RCA is a formal problem-solving and reporting process and a critical component of Problem Management. Once a problem or potential problem has been identified, the root cause analysis process begins. The purpose of a root cause analysis is two-fold develop a thorough understanding of the problem and its causes and its consequences identify correctivepreventive actions that will reduce the risk of recurrence to an acceptable level Classic root-cause analysis methods include the 5-whys and Ishikawa diagram or fishbone diagram . Others have since developed more advanced root cause analysis methodologies, some with corresponding software applications. Benefits from employing a standard, structured root-cause analysis methodology include common terms, language, and structure with respect to root cause analysis problem identification, including actual and potential impact identification of the problems causes, their interactions, and the supporting evidence identification of correctivepreventive actions  CAPA  that will prevent recurrence of the problem development of a knowledge base which others can use as a resource. Identity management  edit  Main article Identity management Identity management IdM less commonly called Access and Identity Management AIM as a process focuses on granting authorized users the right to use a service, while preventing access to non-authorized users. Certain identity management processes execute policies defined in Security Management . Continual service improvement CSI  edit  Continual service improvement, defined in the ITIL continual service improvement volume, 27  aims to align and realign IT services to changing business needs by identifying and implementing improvements to the IT services that support the business processes. It incorporates many of the same concepts articulated in the Deming Cycle of Plan-Do-Check-Act . The perspective of CSI on improvement is the business perspective of service quality, even though CSI aims to improve process effectiveness, efficiency and cost effectiveness of the IT processes through the whole lifecycle. To manage improvement, CSI should clearly define what should be controlled and measured. CSI needs upfront planning, training and awareness, ongoing scheduling, roles created, ownership assigned, and activities identified to be successful. CSI must be planned and scheduled as process with defined activities, inputs, outputs, roles and reporting. Continual Service Improvement and Application Performance Management APM are two sides of the same coin. They both focus on improvement with APM tying together service design , service transition , and service operation which in turn helps raise the bar of operational excellence for IT. 32  Improvement initiatives typically follow a seven-step process Identify the strategy for improvement Define what you will measure Gather the data Process the data Analyze the information and data Present and use the information Implement improvement ITIL Version 2  edit  Overview of ITIL Version 2  edit  The eight ITIL Version 2 books and their disciplines are The IT service management sets 1. Service Support 2. Service Delivery Other operational guidance 3. ICT infrastructure management 4. Security management 5. Application management 6. Software asset management To assist with the implementation of ITIL practices a further book was published Apr 9, 2002 providing guidance on implementation mainly of Service Management 7. Planning to implement service management And this has more recently Jan 26, 2006 been supplemented with guidelines for smaller IT units, not included in the original eight publications 8. ITIL small-scale implementation Service support  edit  The Service Support 33  ITIL discipline focuses on the User of the ICT services and is primarily concerned with ensuring that they have access to the appropriate services to support the business functions. To a business, customers and users are the entry point to the process model. They get involved in service support by Asking for changes Needing communication, updates Having difficulties, queries Real process delivery The service desk functions are the single contact-point for end-users  incidents. Its first function is always to document create an incident. If there is a direct solution, it attempts to resolve the incident at the first level. If the service desk cannot solve the incident then it is passed to a 2nd3rd level group within the incident management system. Incidents can initiate a chain of processes incident management, problem management , change management , release management and configuration management . This chain of processes is tracked using the configuration management database  CMDB , - ITIL refers to configuration management system  CMS , which records each process, and creates output documents for traceability quality management. Note - CMDBCMS does not have to be a single database. The solution can be Federated. Service delivery  edit  The service delivery 34  discipline concentrates on the proactive services the ICT must deliver to provide adequate support to business users. It focuses on the business as the customer of the ICT services compare with service support . The discipline consisted of the following processes Service level management Capacity management IT service continuity management Availability management Financial management ICT infrastructure management  edit  Information and Communication Technology ICT management 35  processes recommend best practice for requirements analysis, planning, design, deployment and ongoing operations management and technical support of an ICT infrastructure. The infrastructure management processes describe those processes within ITIL that directly relate to the ICT equipment and software that is involved in providing ICT services to customers. ICT design and planning ICT deployment ICT operations ICT technical support These disciplines are less well understood than those of service management and therefore often some of their content is believed to be covered by implication in service management disciplines. ICT design and planning  edit  ICT design and planning provides a framework and approach for the strategic and technical design and planning of ICT infrastructures. It includes the necessary combination of business and overall IS strategy, with technical design and architecture. ICT design and planning drives both the procurement of new ICT solutions through the production of statements of requirement SO R and invitations to tender ITT and is responsible for the initiation and management of ICT Programmes for strategic business change. Key outputs from design and planning are ICT strategies, policies and plans. the ICT overall architecture  management architecture feasibility studies, ITTs and SORs business cases ICT deployment management  edit  ICT deployment provides a framework for the successful management of design, build, test and roll-out deploy projects within an overall ICT programme . It includes many project management disciplines in common with PRINCE2 , but has a broader focus to include the necessary integration of release management and both functional and non functional testing. ICT operations management  edit  ICT operations management provides the day-to-day technical supervision of the ICT infrastructure. Often confused with the role of incident management from service support, operations has a more technical bias and is concerned not solely with incidents reported by users, but with events generated by or recorded by the infrastructure. ICT operations may often work closely alongs ide incident management and the service desk, which are not-necessarily technical, to provide an operations bridge. Operations, however should primarily work from documented processes and procedures and should be concerned with a number of specific sub-processes, such as output management, job scheduling, backup and restore, network monitoringmanagement, system monitoringm anagement, database monitoringmanagement storage monitoringmanagement. Operations are responsible for the following a stable, secure ICT infrastructure a current, up to date operational documentation library ODL a log of all operational events maintenance of operational monitoring and management tools. operational scripts.. operational procedures ITIL Framework the image is incorrect Service Design phase includes Supplier management process which is missed here ICT technical support  edit  ICT technical support is the specialist technical function for infrastructure within ICT. Primarily as a support to other processes, both in infrastructure management and service management, technical support provides a number of specialist functions research and evaluation, market intelligence particularly for design and planning and capacity management, proof of concept an d pilot engineering, specialist technical expertise particularly to operations and problem management, creation of documentation perhaps for the operational documentation library or known error database. There are different levels of support under the ITIL structure, these being primary support level, secondary support level and tertiary support level , higher-level administrators being responsible for support at primary level. The Known Error Database KEDB database contains all known error records. This database is created by problem management and used by incident management and problem management, and as part of service knowledge management systems. Planning to implement service management  edit  The ITIL discipline  planning to implement service management 36  attempts to provide practitioners with a framework for the alignment of business needs and IT provision requirements. The processes and approaches incorporated within the guidelines suggest the development of a continuous service improvement program CSIP as the basis for implementing other ITIL disciplines as projects within a controlled program of work. Planning to implemen t service management focuses mainly on the service management processes, but also applies generically to other ITIL disciplines. Components include creating vision analysing organization setting goals implementing IT service management Small-scale implementation  edit  ITIL Small-scale implementation 37  provides an approach to ITIL framework implementation for smaller IT units or departments. It is primarily an auxiliary work that covers many of the same best practice guidelines as planning to implement service management, service support, and service delivery but provides additional guidance on the combination of roles and responsibilities, and avoiding conflict between ITIL priorities. The typical IT Organizational structure that maps to ITIL framework. IT organizational Structure Related frameworks  edit  A number of frameworks exist in the field of IT Service Management alongside ITIL. Descendants  edit  Microsoft Operations Framework  edit  The Microsoft Operations Framework MOF is based on ITIL Version 2. While ITIL deliberately aims to be platform-independent, MOF is designed by Microsoft to provide a common management framework for its products. Microsoft has mapped MOF to ITIL as part of their documentation of the framework. 38  FITS  edit  The British Educational Communications and Technology Agency  BECTA  used ITIL as the basis for their development of Framework for ICT Technical Support FITS. Their aim was to develop a framework appropriate for British schools, which often have very small IT departments. FITS became independent from BECTA in 2009 and is now maintained and supported by The FITS Foundation. FITS is now used in excess of a thousand schools in the UK, Australia and Norway as the standard for ICT Service Management in the Education sector Video What people are saying  Other frameworks  edit  The process framework of the ISOIEC 20000 standard previously BS 15000 is largely equivalent that of the Service Support and Service Delivery parts of ITIL Version 2. 39  While it is not possible for an organization to be certified as being ITIL compliant, certification of an organization is available for ISOIEC 20000. 40  COBIT is an IT governance framework and supporting toolset developed by ISACA . ISACA view ITIL as being complementary to COBIT. They see COBIT as providing a governance and assurance role while ITIL providing guidance for service management. 41  The Business Process Framework eTOM published by the TeleManagement Forum offers a framework aimed at telecommunications service providers. In a joined effort, TM Forum and itSMF developed an Application Note to eTOM GB921 that shows how the two frameworks can be mapped to each other. It addresses how eTom process elements and flows can be used to support the processes identified in ITIL. 42  43  IBM Tivoli Unified Process ITUP is aligned with ITIL, but is presented as a complete, integrated process model compatible with IBMs products. FitSM 44  is a standard for lightweight service management. Its process framework is quite similar to that of ISOIEC 20000 and the Service Support and Service Delivery parts of ITIL Version 2, but adopts Service Portfolio Management from later ITIL versions. FitSM contains several parts, including samples and templates for core ITSM documents, that are published under Creative Common licenses . DevOps , an emerging framework which focus on continuous integration and delivery of software. It recognizes that the relationship between developer team and operations team is broken and fills in the gap to promote trust between two teams. 45  This solves the gap that ITIL framework createsteams working in silo where they possess a not my issues attitude. 46  Certification  edit  ITIL 4  edit  The new ITIL 4 Foundation which is an update from ITIL v32011 was launched on 18 February 2019. ITIL 4 is a new certification scheme that will slowly replace the existing scheme it is based on the transformation to a digital environment. It is designed to offer a clearer career path for professionals from Foundation to higher levels. There is no Bridge exam for current ITIL Fo undation holders to ITIL 4 Foundation. Candidates who hold the current ITIL Foundation will need to take the ITIL 4 Foundation to be certified in the new scheme or they would need to accumulate 17 ITIL v3 credits and then take the transition module. Individuals  edit  The certification scheme  clarification needed  differs between ITIL Version 2 and ITIL 20072011, and bridge examinations now retired allowed owners of ITIL Version 2 certificates to transfer to the new program.  citation needed  ITIL Version 2 offers three certification levels Foundation , Practitioner and Manager . These were progressively discontinued in favour of the new scheme introduced along with the publication of the 2007 Edition. ITIL certification levels are now Foundation , Intermediate , Expert and Master . In addition, the single-process practitioner certifications that were offered by OGC for ITIL Version 2 have now been replaced and the offering expanded by what are known as complementary certifications. 47  The ITIL certification scheme now offers a modular approach. Each qualification is assigned a credit value so that upon successful completion of the module, the candidate is rewarded with both a certification and a number of credits. At the lowest level  Foundation  candidates are awarded a certification and two credits. At the Intermediate level, a total of additional 15 cr edits have to be earned. These credits may be accumulated in either a Lifecycle stream note 1  or a Capability stream note 2  or combination thereof. Each Lifecycle module and exam is three credits. Each Capability module and corresponding exam is four credits. A candidate wanting to achieve the Expert level will have, among other requirements, to gain the required number of credits 22. That is accomplished with two from Foundations, then at least 15 from Intermediate, and finally five credits from the Managing Across the Lifecycle exam. Together, the total of 22 earned credits allows a person to request designation as an ITIL Expert. Advancing from the expert to the master level does not require additional credits, but does require at least five years of IT domain work experience and an extensive usage of ITIL practices. 48  The complementary certifications also have point values, ranging from 0.5 to 1.5 credits, which can be applied towards ITIL Expert certification. However, only a maximum of six credits from complementary certifications can be applied towards the Expert certification. 49  The ITIL Certification Management Board ICMB manages ITIL certification. The Board includes representatives from interested parties within the community around the world. Members of the Board include though are not limited to representatives from the UK Office of Government Commerce OGC, APM Group APMG, The Stationery Office TSO, ITIL Examination Panel, Examination Institutes EIs and the IT Service Management Forum International  it SMF as the recognised user group. 50  Since the early 1990s, EXIN and ISEB had been setting up the ITIL based certification program, developing and providing ITIL exams at three different levels Foundation, Practitioner and Manager. EXIN 51  and BCSISEB 52  the British Computer Society had from that time onwards been the only two examination providers in the world to develop formally acknowledged ITIL certifications, provide ITIL exams and accredit ITIL training providers worldwide. These rights were obtained from OGC, the British government institution and owner of the ITIL trademark.  citation needed  OGC signed over the management of the ITIL trademark and the accreditation of examination providers to APM Group in 2006. Now, after signing a contract with EXIN , 51  BCSISEB, Loyalist Certification Services 1 , PeopleCert Group and other certification bodies, APM Group has accredited them as official examination bodies, to offer ITIL exams and accredit ITIL training providers.  citation needed  On July 20, 2006, the OGC signed a contract with the APM Group to become its commercial partner for ITIL accreditation from January 1, 2007. 53  APMG manage the ITIL Version 3 exams. APMG maintains a voluntary register of ITIL certified practitioners at their Successful Candidate Register. 54  Since 2014, Axelos is the owner of the ITIL personnel certification scheme. ITIL exams are administered by Accredited Training Organizations ATOs which are accredited by Examination Institute EI. 55  The Examination Institutes , which issue the ITIL certificates, in turn need to be accredited by Axelos. 56  Pins  edit  There are no ITIL Version 4 pins. This section contains content that is written like an advertisement . Please help improve it by removing promotional content and inappropriate external links , and by adding encyclopedic content written from a neutral point of view .  March 2017   Learn how and when to remove this template message  An ITIL Version 2 Foundation Badge. Following the passing an APMG EXIN exam in IT service management based on ITIL, some people will wear a metal pin on their shirt or jacket. This badge, provided by the ITSMF with basic gold colour is set in the form of the ITIL-logo. The ITIL pins consist of a small, diamond-like structure. The meaning and the shape of the diamond is meant to depict coherence in the IT industry infrastructure as well. The four corners of the pin symbolise service support, service delivery, infrastructure management and IT management. There were five colours of ITIL Version 3 pins - each corresponds to the colour of the associated core publication ITIL Foundation Badge Pastel Green. This ITIL lapel pin takes its colour from the ITIL Service Strategy book and is awarded on successful completion of the ITIL Foundation exam. ITIL Intermediate Capability Badge Burgundy. There are four ITIL Capability courses. RCV, OSA, SOA, PPO. You are able to apply for this lapel pin once you have passed each exam. Some examination institutes such as APMG International will send the pins automatically with the candidates certificate. This badge shares its colour with the ITIL Service Transition book. ITIL Intermediate Lifecycle Badge Teal. For each of the five ITIL Lifecycle courses SS, SD, ST, SO, CSI, candidates receive this lapel pin after passing the exam. The colour for this pin is based on the ITIL Service Operation book. ITIL Expert Badge Lilac. This is currently the highest qualification available with ITIL. The lapel pin is awarded to a candidate who attains 22 credits through a combination of ITIL training courses. The pin takes its colour from the ITIL Continual Service Improvement book. ITIL Master Badge Purple, with the letter M in the middle. Currently in pilot phase this qualification has no training course or exam associated with it. To gain qualification as an ITIL Master, candidates have to have hisher work peer-reviewed by a panel of experts. Once an ITIL Expert has achieved this status, the ITIL Master can wear a lapel pin based on the colour of the ITIL Service Design book, which also has a Gold M in the centre. There are three colours of ITIL Version 2 pins ITIL Version 2 Foundation Badge green ITIL Version 2 Practitioner Badge blue ITIL Version 2 Manager Badge red Exam candidates who have successfully passed the examinations for ITIL will receive their appropriate pin from APMG, EXIN or their certification provider regional office or agent. Organizations  edit  Organizations and management systems cannot claim certification as ITIL-compliant. An organization that has implemented ITIL guidance in IT Service Management ITSM, may be able to achieve compliance with and seek certification under ISOIEC 20000 . However, while relatively closely aligned, ISOIEC 20000 and ITIL Version 2 do not define identical processes. 57  This gap has become much wider with ITIL versions 2007 and 2011. ITIL now defines twice as many ITSM processes as ISOIEC 20000 26 compared to 13, 58  but there are also more subtle differences, for example 59  ISOIEC 20000 only recognises the management of financial assets, not assets which include management, organization, process, knowledge, people, information, applications, infrastructure and financial capital, nor the concept of a service asset. So ISOIEC 20000 certification does not address the management of assets in an ITIL sense. ISO20000 does not recognise Configuration Management System CMS or Service Knowledge Management System SKMS, and so does not certify anything beyond Configuration Management Database  CMDB . An organization can obtain ISOIEC 20000 certification without recognising or implementing the ITIL concept of Known Error, which is usually considered essential to ITIL. Criticism  edit  This articles Criticism or Controversy section may compromise the articles neutral point of view of the subject . Please integrate the sections contents into the article as a whole, or rewrite the material.  February 2013  While a number of researchers have investigated the benefits of the ITIL implementation, 60  61  it has been criticised on several fronts, including the books are not affordable for non-commercial users implementation and accreditation requires specific training debate over ITIL falling under BSM or ITSM frameworks the ITIL details are not aligned with the other frameworks like ITSM Rob England author of the IT Skeptic blog has criticised the protected and proprietary nature of ITIL. 62  He urges the publisher, Cabinet Office, to release ITIL under the Open Government Licence OGL. 63  CIO Magazine columnist Dean Meyer has also presented some cautionary views of ITIL, 64  including five pitfalls such as becoming a slave to outdated definitions and letting ITIL become religion. As he notes, ...it doesnt describe the complete range of processes needed to be world class. Its focused on ... managing ongoing services. In a 2004 survey designed by Noel Bruton author of How to Manage the IT Helpdesk and Managing the IT Services Process, organizations adopting ITIL were asked to relate their actual experiences in having implemented ITIL. 77 of survey respondents either agreed or strongly agreed that ITIL does not have all the answers. ITIL proponents accept this, citing ITILs stated i ntention to be non-prescriptive, expecting organizations to engage ITIL processes with existing process models. Bruton notes that the claim to non-prescriptiveness must be, at best, one of scale rather than absolute intention, for the very description of a certain set of processes is in itself a form of prescription. 65  While ITIL addresses in depth the various aspects of service management, it does not address enterprise architecture in such depth. Many of the shortcomings in the implementation of ITIL do not necessarily come about because of flaws in the design or implementation of the service management aspects of the business, but rather the wider architectural framework in which the business is situated. Because of its primary focus on service management, ITIL has limited utility in managing poorly des igned enterprise architectures, or how to feed back into the design of the enterprise architecture. Closely related to the architectural criticism, ITIL does not directly address the business applications which run on the IT infrastructure nor does it facilitate a more collaborative working relationship between development and operations teams. The trend toward a closer working relationship between development and operations is termed DevOps . This trend is related to increased application release rates and the adoption of agile software development methodologies. Traditional service management processes have struggled to support increased application release rates  due to lack of automation  andor highly complex enterprise architecture . See also  edit  Application Services Library  A similar framework for Application Management Business Information Services Library BiSL  A similar framework for Information Management and Functional Management Granular configuration automation ISOIEC 20000  An international standard for IT service management Tudor IT Process Assessment  An framework for assessment of IT service management maturity Performance engineering RPR problem diagnosis Notes  edit   The Lifecycle stream follows the ITIL core volumes there are therefore 5 modules also called Service Strategy , Service Design , Service Transition , Service Operation and Continual Service Improvement .  The Capability stream is more focused on process activities the 4 modules available in 2013 are Operational support and analysis OSA, Service offerings and agreements SOA, Planning protection and optimization PPO and Release, control and validation RCV. References  edit   Hearsum, Phil 2018-06-04. ITILs the name - you wont wear it out . AXELOS . Retrieved 2019-03-03 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  httpswww.cio.comarticle2439501infrastructure-it-infrastructure-library-itil-definition-and-solutions.html  Axelos 2019-02-18. ITIL Foundation, ITIL 4 edition . Axelos . Retrieved 2019-02-24 .  David Clifford Jan van Bon 2008. Implementing ISOIEC 20000 Certification The Roadmap . ITSM Library. Van Haren Publishing. ISBN   978-90-8753-082-2 .  Office of Government Commerce UK. CCTA and OGC. Retrieved on 2005-05-05 from httpwww.ogc.gov.ukindex.aspid1878 .  Office of Government Commerce UK. Retrieved on 2009-08-19 from httpwww.ogc.gov.ukguidance_itil.asp .  AXELOS 2019. 1.3 The structure and benefits of the ITIL 4 framework. ITIL Foundation, ITIL 4 edition . TSO The Stationery Office. ISBN   978-0113316076 .  AXELOS 2019. 4.1 Service value system overview. ITIL Foundation, ITIL 4 edition . TSO The Stationery Office. ISBN   978-0113316076 .  AXELOS 2019. 4.5 Service value chain. ITIL Foundation, ITIL 4 edition . TSO The Stationery Office. ISBN   978-0113316076 .  AXELOS 2019. 5. ITIL management practices. ITIL Foundation, ITIL 4 edition . TSO The Stationery Office. ISBN   978-0113316076 .  AXELOS 2019. 4.3 The ITIL guiding principles. ITIL Foundation, ITIL 4 edition . TSO The Stationery Office. ISBN   978-0113316076 .  AXELOS 2019. 4.4 Governance. ITIL Foundation, ITIL 4 edition . TSO The Stationery Office. ISBN   978-0113316076 .  AXELOS 2019. 4.6 Continual improvement. ITIL Foundation, ITIL 4 edition . TSO The Stationery Office. ISBN   978-0113316076 .  AXELOS 2019. 3. The four dimensions of service management. ITIL Foundation, ITIL 4 edition . TSO The Stationery Office. ISBN   978-0113316076 .  AXELOS 2019. 3.1 Organizations and people. ITIL Foundation, ITIL 4 edition . TSO The Stationery Office. ISBN   978-0113316076 .  AXELOS 2019. 3.2 Information and technology. ITIL Foundation, ITIL 4 edition . TSO The Stationery Office. ISBN   978-0113316076 .  AXELOS 2019. 3.3 Partners and suppliers. ITIL Foundation, ITIL 4 edition . TSO The Stationery Office. ISBN   978-0113316076 .  AXELOS 2019. 3.4 Value streams and processes. ITIL Foundation, ITIL 4 edition . TSO The Stationery Office. ISBN   978-0113316076 .  AXELOS 2019. 5.1 General management practices. ITIL Foundation, ITIL 4 edition . TSO The Stationery Office. ISBN   978-0113316076 .  AXELOS 2019. 5.2 Service management practices. ITIL Foundation, ITIL 4 edition . TSO The Stationery Office. ISBN   978-0113316076 .  AXELOS 2019. 5.3 Technical management practices. ITIL Foundation, ITIL 4 edition . TSO The Stationery Office. ISBN   978-0113316076 .  OGC withdrawal of ITIL version2 . Archived from the original on 2010-01-23.  a b FSM. David Cannon 2011. ITIL Service Strategy 2011 Edition . The Stationery Office. ISBN   978-0113313044 .  a b Lou Hunnebeck 2011. ITIL Service Design . The Stationery Office. ISBN   978-0113313051 .  a b Stuart Rance 2011. ITIL Service Transition . The Stationery Office. ISBN   978-0113313068 .  a b Randy A. Steinberg 2011. ITIL Service Operation . The Stationery Office. ISBN   978-0113313075 .  a b Vernon Lloyd 2011. ITIL Continual Service Improvement . The Stationery Office. ISBN   978-0113313082 .  ITIL Strategy Management .  Cazemier, Jacques A. Overbeek, Paul L. Peters, Louk M. 2000. Security Management . The Stationery Office. ISBN   978-0-11-330014-3 .  Office of Government Commerce 2002. Application Management . The Stationery Office. ISBN   978-0-11-330866-8 .  The DNA of APM - Event to Incident Flow . APM Digest. 4 June 2012.  Prioritizing Gartners APM Model The APM Conceptual Framework . APM Digest. 15 March 2012.  Office of Government Commerce 2000. Service Support . The Stationery Office. ISBN   978-0-11-330015-0 .  Office of Government Commerce 2001. Service Delivery . IT Infrastructure Library . The Stationery Office. ISBN   978-0-11-330017-4 .  Office of Government Commerce 2002. ICT Infrastructure Management . The Stationery Office. ISBN   978-0-11-330865-1 .  Office of Government Commerce 2002. Planning to Implement Service Management . The Stationery Office. ISBN   978-0-11-330877-4 .  Office of Government Commerce 2005. ITIL Small Scale Implementation . The Stationery Office. ISBN   978-0-11-330980-1 .  Microsoft Operations Framework Cross Reference ITIL and MOF 4.0 . Microsoft Corporation. May 2009. Cite journal requires journal  help   Van Bon, Jan Verheijen, Tieneke 2006, Frameworks for IT Management , Van Haren Publishing, ISBN   978-90-77212-90-5  ITIL FAQ . AXELOS.com.  ISACA 2008, COBIT Mapping Mapping of ITIL V3 With COBIT 4.1 , ITGI, ISBN   978-1-60420-035-5  Brooks, Peter 2006, Metrics for IT Service Management , Van Haren Publishing, pp.  7677, ISBN   978-90-77212-69-1  Morreale, Patricia A. Terplan, Kornel 2009, 3.6.10.2 Matching ITIL to eTOM , CRC Handbook of Modern Telecommunications, Second Edition 2 ed., CRC Press, ISBN   978-1-4200-7800-8  FitSM . FedSM Project . Retrieved 2012-12-12 .  Sharp-Paul, Alan. ITIL Guide to DevOps - eBook . Retrieved 2017-07-31 .  Bloomberg, Jason. DevOps And ITIL Friends Or Enemies . Forbes . Retrieved 2017-07-31 .  ITIL Complementary Qualifications . ITIL Official Site . Retrieved 2013-01-25 . Cite journal requires journal  help   ITIL Qualification Scheme Brochure . ITIL Official Website . Retrieved 2014-01-09 . Cite journal requires journal  help   ITIL Credit Profiler Tool . ITIL Official Site . Retrieved 2013-01-25 . Cite journal requires journal  help   APMG 2008. ITIL Service Management Practices V3 Qualifications Scheme . Retrieved 24 February 2009 .  a b EXIN Exams . EXIN Exams . Retrieved 2010-01-14 .  ISEB Professionals Qualifications, Training, Careers BCS  The Chartered Institute for IT . BCS . Retrieved 2010-01-14 .  Office of Government Commerce 2006. Best Practice portfolio new contracts awarded for publishing and accreditation services . Retrieved 19 September 2006 .  Archived copy . Archived from the original on 2011-09-12 . Retrieved 2011-09-20 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  CS1 maint archived copy as title  link   Training Organization and Trainer Accreditation . Axelos . Retrieved 2012-12-12 .  Examination Institutes . Axelos . Retrieved 2012-12-12 .  Jenny Dugmore Alison Holt 2005. ISOIEC 20000 and ITIL  The Difference Explained .  Pink Elephant 2011. Definitive ITIL 2011  2007 Edition Process  Function Lists PDF . Retrieved 2014-12-23 .  Office of Government Commerce 2008. Best Management Practice ITIL V3 and ISOIEC 20000 PDF . Retrieved 24 February 2009 .  Marrone, Mauricio Kolbe, Lutz M. 2011-01-15. Impact of IT Service Management Frameworks on the IT Organization. Business  Information Systems Engineering . 3 1 518. doi  10.1007s12599-010-0141-5 . ISSN   1867-0202 .  Pollard, Carol Cater-Steel, Aileen 2009-04-14. Justifications, Strategies, and Critical Success Factors in Successful ITIL Implementations in U.S. and Australian Companies An Exploratory Study. Information Systems Management . 26 2 164175. CiteSeerX   10.1.1.631.8883 . doi  10.108010580530902797540 . ISSN   1058-0530 .  Free ITIL . The IT Skeptic. 2013-08-20 . Retrieved 2013-11-12 .  Open Government Licence . Nationalarchives.gov.uk . Retrieved 2013-11-12 .  Meyer, Dean, 2005. Beneath the Buzz ITIL , CIO Magazine, March 31, 2005  Survey The ITIL Experience  Has It Been Worth It, author Bruton Consultancy 2004, published by Helpdesk Institute Europe, The Helpdesk and IT Support Show, and Hornbill Software. External links  edit  Wikibooks has a book on the topic of ITIL v3 Information Technology Infrastructure Library Official website ITIL V4 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleITIL oldid914515713  Categories  Information technology management Method engineering ITIL Hidden categories CS1 errors missing periodical CS1 errors deprecated parameters CS1 maint archived copy as title Use British English from July 2012 Articles that may be too long from June 2019 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2011 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2009 All articles containing potentially dated statements Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2012 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2010 Articles with a promotional tone from March 2017 All articles with a promotional tone Articles needing POV-check from February 2013 All NPOV disputes