National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia    Redirected from NCEES  Jump to navigation Jump to search National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying Motto Advancing licensure for engineers and surveyors Formation 1920 1  Type National non-profit Headquarters Greenville, South Carolina Location United States President James Purcell PE 2  Website ncees .org The National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying NCEES is an American non-profit organization dedicated to advancing professional licensure for engineers and surveyors . The Councils members are the engineering and surveying licensure boards from all 50 U.S. states, the District of Columbia, Guam, Northern Mariana Islands, Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. These boards are divided into four geographic zones Central, Northeast, Southern, Western. It is headquartered in Greenville, South Carolina . Contents 1 Engineering 2 Land Surveying 3 Records 4 Credentials evaluations 5 Exam preparation materials 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Engineering  edit  NCEES develops and scores the FE, PE and SE exams for engineering licensure. The FE exam is generally the first step in the process to becoming a professional licensed engineer PE. It is designed for recent graduates and students who are close to finishing an undergraduate engineering degree from an EACABET- accredited program. The PE exam is designed to test for a minimum l evel of competency in a particular engineering discipline. It is designed for engineers who have gained a minimum of four years of work experience in their chosen engineering discipline. The SE exam is designed for engineers who practice in jurisdictions that license structural engineers separately from other professional engineers. The Fundamentals of Engineering exam FE exam is generally the first step in the process to becoming a professional licensed engineer PE. It is designed for recent graduates and students who are close to finishing an undergraduate engineering degree from an EACABET-accredited program. The FE exam is a computer-based exam administered year-round at NCEES-approved Pearson VUE test centers. 3  The Principles and Practice of Engineering Exam PE exam tests for a minimum level of competency in a particular engineering discipline. It is designed for engineers who have gained a minimum of four years post-college work experience in their chosen engineering discipline. The Structural Engineering exam SE exam tests for a minimum level of competency in structural engineering. It is designed for engineers who practice in jurisdictions that license structural engineers separately from other professional engineers. This 16-hour exam uses separate vertical and lateral components to test ones ability to safely design buildings or bridges, especially in areas of high seismicity and high wind. Land Surveying  edit  NCEES also prepares examinations for land surveyor licensing in the United States. These exams consist of The Fundamentals of Surveying FS exam is generally the first step in the process to becoming a professional licensed surveyor PS. It is designed for recent graduates and students who are close to finishing an undergraduate surveying degree from an ABET accredited program. The FS exam is a computer-based exam administered year-round in testing windows at NCEES-approved Pears on VUE test centers. 3  The Principles and Practice of Surveying PS exam tests ones ability to practice the surveying profession competently. It is designed for surveyors who have gained at least four years of professional experience. Records  edit  The NCEES Records program is designed for currently licensed engineers and surveyors who are looking for an easier and faster way to complete the licensure process in multiple jurisdictions, including all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Guam, Puerto Rico, Northern Mariana Islands and the U.S. Virgin Islands. An established NCEES Record will include mostif not allof the m aterials one needs to apply for comity licensure in additional states and territories. Credentials evaluations  edit  NCEES Credentials Evaluations is a service for state licensing boards and applicants. It is designed primarily for candidates who have earned their degrees outside the United States and are pursuing licensure through one of the member licensing boards of NCEES. 4  Exam preparation materials  edit  NCEES exam preparation materials include questions that have been used on past exams and questions written to give examinees extra practice. See also  edit  Engineering Graduate Aptitude Test in Engineering GATE Glossary of engineering Glossary of civil engineering Glossary of electrical and electronics engineering Glossary of mechanical engineering Glossary of structural engineering Glossary of biology Glossary of chemistry Glossary of economics Glossary of physics Glossary of probability and statistics Washington Accord Sydney Accord Dublin Accord Regulation and licensure in engineering Accreditation Board of Engineering and Technology ABET References  edit   The history of NCEES . National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying. Archived from the original on 2012-12-13 . Retrieved 2012-12-19 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  About NCEES . National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying . Retrieved 2012-12-19 .  a b The CBT experience . National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying. Archived from the original on 2013-01-16 . Retrieved 2012-12-19 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Credentials Evaluations . National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying . Retrieved 2012-12-19 . External links  edit  Official website v t e Glossaries of science and engineering Aerospace engineering Archaeology Architecture Artificial intelligence Astronomy Biology Botany Calculus Chemistry Civil engineering Clinical research Computer science Ecology Economics Electrical and electronics engineering Engineering Entomology Environmental science Genetics Geography Geology Machine vision Mathematics Mechanical engineering Medicine Meteorology Physics Probability and statistics Psychiatry Robotics Speciation Structural engineering Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleNational_Council_of_Examiners_for_Engineering_and_Surveying oldid898288855  Categories  Professional certification in engineering American engineering organizations Organizations based in South Carolina Organizations established in 1920 Surveying organizations Hidden categories CS1 errors deprecated parameters Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia