Medical grade silicone From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Medical grade silicones are silicones tested for biocompatibility and are appropriate to be used for medical applications. In the United States, the Food and Drug Administration FDA Center for Devices and Radiological Health CDRH regulates devices implanted into the body. It does not regulate materials other than certain dental materials. The FDA regulate silicones used in food contact under the auspices of the Center for Food Safety and Nutrition CFSAN and for use in pharmaceuticals under the auspices of the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research CDER. Medical grade silicones are generally grouped into three categories non implantable, short term implantable, and long-term implantable. Materials approved as Class V and VI can be considered medical grade. Most medical grade silicones are at least Class VI certified. Silicone suppliers and some silicone prototyping companies provide guidelines for material use. 1  2  Contents 1 Uses 2 Limitations 3 See also 4 References Uses  edit  Tubing Drains Feeding tubes Catheters Implants for long and short term use Seals and gaskets Syringe pistons Scar Treatment Silicone Sheets FDA Class 1 Medical Device and gels. Condoms Menstrual cups Sex toys Non-Stick Containers Respiratory masks 3  Limitations  edit  Silicone rubber applications such as catheters are widespread in medicine, but have several limitations. For example, they exhibit poor tear strength and poor resistance to fatigue . Brittle fracture can occur from defects within sections owing to poor control of vulcanization . It resulted in high failure rates for breast implants , and much subsequent litigation in the USA, as well as elsewhere in the world. It led to a crisis of confidence in the US, with many manufacturers being forced out of the business entirely, and others to manufacture under FDA control. See also  edit  Silicone United States Pharmacopeia U.S. Food and Drug Administration Silicone rubber Polymers Plastics engineering References  edit   - Silicone Molding Design Manual  Silicone Straw . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em Wednesday, 10 October 2018  httpwww.cva-silicone.comensilicone-life-sciences Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleMedical_grade_silicone oldid863275332  Categories  Biomaterials Elastomers Implants medicine Silicones Siloxanes