Image compression From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Reduction of image size to save storage and transmission costs This article includes a list of references , but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations . Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.  April 2010   Learn how and when to remove this template message  It has been suggested that this article be merged with Intra-frame coding .  Discuss  Proposed since October 2018. Image compression is a type of data compression applied to digital images , to reduce their cost for storage or transmission . Algorithms may take advantage of visual perception and the statistical properties of image data to provide superior results compared with generic data compression methods which are used for other digital data. 1  Comparison of JPEG images saved by Adobe Photoshop at different quality levels and with or without save for web Contents 1 Lossy and lossless image compression 2 Other properties 3 Notes and references 4 External links Lossy and lossless image compression  edit  Image compression may be lossy or lossless . Lossless compression is preferred for archival purposes and often for medical imaging, technical drawings, clip art , or comics. Lossy compression methods, especially when used at low bit rates , introduce compression artifacts . Lossy methods are especially suitable for natural images such as photographs in applications where minor sometimes imperceptible loss of fidelity is acceptable to achieve a substantial reduction in bit rate. Lossy compression that produces negligible differences may be called visually lossless. Methods for lossy compression  Transform coding  This is the most commonly used method. Discrete Cosine Transform DCT  The most widely used form of lossy compression. It is a type of Fourier-related transform , and was originally developed by Nasir Ahmed , T. Natarajan and K. R. Rao in 1974. 2  The DCT is sometimes referred to as DCT-II in the context of a family of discrete cosine transforms see discrete cosine transform . It is generally the most efficient form of image compression. DCT is used in JPEG , the most popular lossy format, and the more recent HEIF . The more recently developed wavelet transform is also used extensively, followed by quantization and entropy coding . Reducing the color space to the most common colors in the image. The selected colors are specified in the colour palette in the header of the compressed image. Each pixel just references the index of a color in the color palette, this method can be combined with dithering to avoid posterization . Chroma subsampling . This takes advantage of the fact that the human eye perceives spatial changes of brightness more sharply than those of color, by averaging or dropping some of the chrominance information in the image. Fractal compression . Methods for lossless compression  Run-length encoding  used in default method in PCX and as one of possible in BMP , TGA , TIFF Area image compression Predictive coding  used in DPCM Entropy encoding  the two most common entropy encoding techniques are arithmetic coding and Huffman coding Adaptive dictionary algorithms such as LZW  used in GIF and TIFF DEFLATE  used in PNG , MNG , and TIFF Chain codes Other properties  edit  The best image quality at a given compression rate or bit rate  is the main goal of image compression, however, there are other important properties of image compression schemes Scalability generally refers to a quality reduction achieved by manipulation of the bitstream or file without decompression and re-compression. Other names for scalability are progressive coding or embedded bitstreams . Despite its contrary nature, scalability also may be found in lossless codecs, usually in form of coarse-to-fine pixel scans. Scalability is especially useful for previewing images while downloading them e.g., in a web browser or for providing variable quality access to e.g., databases. There are several types of scalability Quality progressive or layer progressive The bitstream successively refines the reconstructed image. Resolution progressive  First encode a lower image resolution then encode the difference to higher resolutions. 3  4  Component progressive  First encode grey-scale version then adding full color. Region of interest coding . Certain parts of the image are encoded with higher quality than others. This may be combined with scalability encode these parts first, others later. Meta information . Compressed data may contain information about the image which may be used to categorize, search, or browse images. Such information may include color and texture statistics, small preview images, and author or copyright information. Processing power . Compression algorithms require different amounts of processing power to encode and decode. Some high compression algorithms require high processing power. The quality of a compression method often is measured by the peak signal-to-noise ratio . It measures the amount of noise introduced through a lossy compression of the image, however, the subjective judgment of the viewer also is regarded as an important measure, perhaps, being the most important measure. Notes and references  edit   Image Data Compression . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Nasir Ahmed , T. Natarajan and K. R. Rao ,  Discrete Cosine Transform , IEEE Trans. Computers , 9093, Jan. 1974.  Burt, P. Adelson, E. 1 April 1983. The Laplacian Pyramid as a Compact Image Code. IEEE Transactions on Communications . 31 4 532540. CiteSeerX   10.1.1.54.299 . doi  10.1109TCOM.1983.1095851 .  Shao, Dan Kropatsch, Walter G. February 35, 2010. paek, Libor Franc, Vojtch eds.. Irregular Laplacian Graph Pyramid PDF . Computer Vision Winter Workshop 2010 . Nov Hrady, Czech Republic Czech Pattern Recognition Society. External links  edit  Image compression    lecture from MIT OpenCourseWare Image Coding Fundamentals A study about image compression    with basics, comparing different compression methods like JPEG2000, JPEG and JPEG XR  HD Photo Data Compression Basics    includes comparison of PNG, JPEG and JPEG-2000 formats FAQWhat is the state of the art in lossless image compression from comp.compression IPRG    an open group related to image processing research resources v t e Data compression methods Lossless Entropy type Arithmetic Asymmetric numeral systems Golomb Huffman Adaptive Canonical Modified Range Shannon ShannonFano ShannonFanoElias Tunstall Unary Universal Exp-Golomb Fibonacci Gamma Levenshtein Dictionary type Byte pair encoding LempelZiv Brotli DEFLATE LZ4 LZFSE LZJB LZMA LZO LZRW LZS LZSS LZW LZWL LZX Snappy Zstandard Other types BWT CTW Delta DMC MTF PAQ PPM RLE Audio Concepts Bit rate ABR CBR VBR Companding Convolution Dynamic range Latency NyquistShannon theorem Sampling Sound quality Speech coding Sub-band coding Codec parts A-law -law DPCM ADPCM FT FFT LPC ACELP CELP LAR LSP WLPC MDCT Psychoacoustic model Image Concepts Chroma subsampling Coding tree unit Color space Compression artifact Image resolution Macroblock Pixel PSNR Quantization Standard test image Methods Chain code DCT EZW Fractal KLT LP RLE SPIHT Wavelet Video Concepts Bit rate ABR CBR VBR Display resolution Frame Frame rate Frame types Interlace Video characteristics Video quality Codec parts DCT Deblocking filter Lapped transform Motion compensation Theory Entropy Information theory Timeline Kolmogorov complexity Lossy DCT Quantization Ratedistortion Redundancy Compression formats Compression software codecs v t e Multimedia compression and container formats Video compression ISO  IEC MJPEG Motion JPEG 2000 MPEG-1 MPEG-2 Part 2 MPEG-4 Part 2ASP Part 10AVC MPEG-H Part 2HEVC MPEG-I Part 3VVC ITU-T H.120 H.261 H.262 H.263 H.264 H.265 DV VVC SMPTE VC-1 VC-2 VC-3 VC-5 AOMedia AV1 IETF VP8 SAC AVS Others Apple Video Bink Cinepak Daala DVI EVC FFV1 Huffyuv Indeo Lagarith Microsoft Video 1 MSU Lossless OMS Video Pixlet ProRes 422 ProRes 4444 QuickTime Animation Graphics RealVideo RTVideo SheerVideo Smacker Sorenson Video, Spark Theora Thor VP3 VP6 VP7 VP9 WMV XEB YULS XVC Audio compression ISO  IEC MPEG-1 Layer III MP3 MPEG-1 Layer II Multichannel MPEG-1 Layer I AAC HE-AAC AAC-LD MPEG Surround MPEG-4 ALS MPEG-4 SLS MPEG-4 DST MPEG-4 HVXC MPEG-4 CELP MPEG-D USAC MPEG-H 3D Audio ITU-T G.711  A-law , -law  G.718 G.719 G.722 G.722.1 G.722.2 G.723 G.723.1 G.726 G.728 G.729 G.729.1 IETF Opus iLBC Speex Vorbis 3GPP AMR AMR-WB AMR-WB EVRC EVRC-B EVS GSM-HR GSM-FR GSM-EFR ETSI AC-3 AC-4 DTS SAC AVS DRA Others ACELP ALAC Asao ATRAC CELT Codec 2 FLAC iSAC Monkeys Audio TTA True Audio MT9 Musepack OptimFROG OSQ QCELP RCELP RealAudio RTAudio SD2 SHN SILK Siren SMV SVOPC TwinVQ VMR-WB VSELP WavPack WMA MQA aptX LDAC Image compression IEC , ISO , ITU-T , W3C , IETF CCITT Group 4 GIF HEIF HEVC JBIG JBIG2 JPEG JPEG-LS JPEG 2000 JPEG XR JPEG XT PNG TIFF TIFFEP TIFFIT Others APNG BPG DjVu EXR FLIF ICER MNG PGF QTVR WBMP WebP Containers ISO  IEC MPEG-ES MPEG-PES MPEG-PS MPEG-TS ISO base media file format MPEG-4 Part 14 MP4 Motion JPEG 2000 MPEG-21 Part 9 MPEG media transport ITU-T H.222.0 T.802 IETF RTP Ogg SMPTE GXF MXF 3GPP 3GP and 3G2 Others AMV ASF AIFF AVI AU BPG Bink Smacker BMP DivX Media Format EVO Flash Video IFF M2TS Matroska WebM QuickTime File Format RatDVD RealMedia RIFF WAV MOD and TOD VOB, IFO and BUP Collaborations NETVC MPEG LA See Compression methods for techniques and Compression software for codecs Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleImage_compression oldid909458180  Categories  Image compression Hidden categories Use American English from January 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Articles with short description Articles lacking in-text citations from April 2010 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles to be merged from October 2018 All articles to be merged