Systems modeling From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Example of an IDEF0 function model . Functional Flow Block Diagram Format. 1  Decomposition structure . Static, dynamic, and requirements models for systems partition. Business Process Modeling Notation Example. Systems modeling or system modeling is the interdisciplinary study of the use of models to conceptualize and construct systems in business and IT development . 2  A common type of systems modeling is function modeling , with specific techniques such as the Functional Flow Block Diagram and IDEF0 . These models can be extended using functional decomposition , and can be linked to requirements models for further systems partition. Contrasting the functional modeling, another type of systems modeling is architectural modeling which uses the systems architecture to conceptually model the structure , behavior , and more views of a system. The Business Process Modeling Notation BPMN, a graphical representation for specifying business processes in a workflow, can also be considered to be a systems modeling language. Contents 1 Overview 2 History 3 Types of systems modeling 4 Specific types of modeling languages 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading Overview  edit  In business and IT development the term systems modeling has multiple meanings. It can relate to the use of model to conceptualize and construct systems the interdisciplinary study of the use of these models the systems modeling, analysis , and design efforts the systems modeling and simulation , such as system dynamics any specific systems modeling language As a field of study systems modeling has emerged with the development of system theory and systems sciences . As a type of modeling systems modeling is based on systems thinking and the systems approach. In business and IT systems modeling contrasts other approaches such as agent based modeling data modeling and mathematical modeling In Methodology for Creating Business Knowledge 1997 Arbnor and Bjerke the systems approach systems modeling was considered to be one of the three basic methodological approaches for gaining business knowledge, beside the analytical approach and the actors approach agent based modeling. 3  History  edit  The function model originates in the 1950s, after in the first half of the 20th century other types of management diagrams had already been developed. The first known Gantt chart was developed in 1896 by Karol Adamiecki , who called it a harmonogram . Because Adamiecki did not publish his chart until 1931 - and in any case his works were published in either Polish or Russian, languages not popular in the West - the chart now bears the name of Henry Gantt 18611919, who designed his chart around the years 1910-1915 and popularized it in the West. 4  One of the first well defined function models, was the Functional Flow Block Diagram FFBD developed by the defense-related TRW Incorporated in the 1950s. 5  In the 1960s it was exploited by the NASA to visualize the time sequence of events in a space systems and flight missions. 6  It is further widely used in classical systems engineering to show the order of execution of system functions. 7  One of the earliest pioneering works in information systems modeling 8  has been done by Young and Kent 1958, who argued Since we may be called upon to evaluate different computers or to find alternative ways of organizing current systems it is necessary to have some means of precisely stating a data processing problem independently of mechanization. 9  They aimed for a precise and abstract way of specifying the informational and time characteristics of a data processing problem, and wanted to create a notation that should enable the analyst to organize the problem around any piece of hardware . Their efforts was not so much focussed on independent systems analysis, but on creating abstract specification and invariant basis for designing different alternative implementations using different hardware components. 8  A next step in IS modeling was taken by CODASYL , an IT industry consortium formed in 1959, who essentially aimed at the same thing as Young and Kent the development of a proper structure for machine independent problem definition language, at the system level of data processing. This led to the development of a specific IS information algebra . 8  Types of systems modeling  edit  In business and IT development systems are modeled with different scopes and scales of complexity, such as Functional modeling Systems architecture Business process modeling Enterprise modeling Further more like systems thinking , systems modeling in can be divided into Systems analysis Hard systems modeling or operational research modeling Soft system modeling And all other specific types of systems modeling, such as form example complex systems modeling, dynamical systems modeling, and critical systems modeling. Specific types of modeling languages  edit  Framework-specific modeling language Systems Modeling Language See also  edit  Behavioral modeling Dynamic systems Human visual system model    a human visual system model used by image processing, video processing, and computer vision SEQUAL framework Software and Systems Modeling Solar system model    a model that illustrate the relative positions and motions of the planets and stars Statistical model Systems analysis Systems design Systems biology modeling Viable system model    a model of the organizational structure of any viable or autonomous system References  edit   Systems Engineering Fundamentals. Archived 2006-02-11 at the Wayback Machine Defense Acquisition University Press, 2001  Research interests Professor Alain Wegmann , Last changed 2006-12-01. Retrieved June 19, 2009.  Ingeman Arbnor, Bjorn Bjerke 2007. Methodology for Creating Business Knowledge . Sage Publications, Inc, 1997. Back cover.  H.L. Gantt, Work, Wages and Profit , published by the Engineering Magazine , New York, 1910 republished as Work, Wages and Profits , Easton, Pennsylvania, Hive Publishing Company, 1974, .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em ISBN   0-87960-048-9 .  Tim Weilkiens 2008. Systems Engineering with SysMLUML Modeling, Analysis, Design . Page 287.  Harold Chestnut 1967. Systems Engineering Methods . Page 254.  Thomas Dufresne  James Martin 2003. Process Modeling for E-Business Archived 2006-12-20 at the Wayback Machine . INFS 770 Methods for Information Systems Engineering Knowledge Management and E-Business. Spring 2003  a b c Janis A. Bubenko jr 2007 From Information Algebra to Enterprise Modelling and Ontologies - a Historical Perspective on Modelling for Information Systems. In Conceptual Modelling in Information Systems Engineering . John Krogstie et al. eds. pp 1-18  Young, J. W., and Kent, H. K. 1958. Abstract Formulation of Data Processing Problems. In Journal of Industrial Engineering . Nov-Dec 1958. 96, pp. 471-479 Further reading  edit  Wikimedia Commons has media related to Systems modeling . Doo-Kwon Baik eds. 2005. Systems modeling and simulation theory and applications   third Asian Simulation Conference, AsiaSim 2004, Jeju Island, Korea, October 46, 2004 . Springer, 2005. ISBN   3-540-24477-8 . Derek W. Bunn, Erik R. Larsen 1997. Systems modelling for energy policy . Wiley, 1997. ISBN   0-471-95794-1 Hartmut Ehrig et al. eds. 2005. Formal methods in software and systems modeling . Springer, 2005 ISBN   3-540-24936-2 D. J. Harris 1985. Mathematics for business, management, and economics a systems modelling approach . E. Horwood, 1985. ISBN   0-85312-821-9 Jiming Liu, Xiaolong Jin, Kwok Ching Tsui 2005. Autonomy oriented computing from problem solving to complex systems modeling . Springer, 2005. ISBN   1-4020-8121-9 Michael Pidd 2004. Systems Modelling Theory and Practice . John Wiley  Sons, 2004. ISBN   0-470-86732-9 Vclav Pinkava 1988. Introduction to Logic for Systems Modelling . Taylor  Francis, 1988. ISBN   0-85626-431-8 v t e Software engineering Fields Computer programming Requirements engineering Software deployment Software design Software maintenance Software testing Systems analysis Formal methods Concepts Data modeling Enterprise architecture Functional specification Modeling language Orthogonality Programming paradigm Software Software archaeology Software architecture Software configuration management Software development methodology Software development process Software quality Software quality assurance Software verification and validation Structured analysis Orientations Agile Aspect-oriented Object orientation Ontology Service orientation SDLC Models Developmental Agile EUP Executable UML Incremental model Iterative model Prototype model RAD UP Scrum Spiral model V-Model Waterfall model XP Other SPICE CMMI Data model ER model Function model Information model Metamodeling Object model Systems model View model Languages IDEF UML USL SysML Software engineers Victor Basili Kent Beck Grady Booch Fred Brooks Barry Boehm Peter Chen Danese Cooper Ward Cunningham Tom DeMarco Edsger W. Dijkstra Delores M. Etter Martin Fowler Adele Goldstine Margaret Hamilton C. A. R. Hoare Lois Haibt Mary Jean Harrold Grace Hopper Watts Humphrey Michael A. Jackson Ivar Jacobson Alan Kay Nancy Leveson Stephen J. Mellor Bertrand Meyer David Parnas Trygve Reenskaug Winston W. Royce James Rumbaugh Mary Shaw Peri Tarr Elaine Weyuker Niklaus Wirth Edward Yourdon Related fields Computer science Computer engineering Project management Risk management Systems engineering Category Commons v t e Systems engineering Subfields Aerospace engineering Biological systems engineering Configuration management Earth systems engineering and management Electrical engineering Enterprise systems engineering Performance engineering Reliability engineering Safety engineering Processes Requirements engineering Functional specification System integration Verification and validation Design review Concepts Business process System System lifecycle V-Model Systems development life cycle Tools Decision-making Function modelling IDEF Optimization Quality function deployment System dynamics Systems Modeling Language Systems analysis Systems modeling Work breakdown structure People James S. Albus Ruzena Bajcsy Benjamin S. Blanchard Wernher von Braun Kathleen Carley Harold Chestnut Wolt Fabrycky Barbara Grosz Arthur David Hall III Derek Hitchins Robert E. Machol Radhika Nagpal Simon Ramo Joseph Francis Shea Katia Sycara Manuela M. Veloso John N. Warfield Related fields Control engineering Computer engineering Industrial engineering Operations research Project management Quality management Risk management Software engineering Category Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSystems_modeling oldid889922200  Categories  Enterprise modelling Software engineering Scientific modeling Systems analysis Systems science Cognitive modeling Hidden categories Webarchive template wayback links Commons category link from Wikidata