Project management software From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Project management software PMS has the capacity to help plan, organize, and manage resource tools and develop resource estimates. Depending on the sophistication of the software, it can manage estimation and planning, scheduling , cost control and budget management , resource allocation , collaboration software , communication , decision-making , quality management and documentation or administration systems. Today, numerous PC and browser-based project management software and contract management software solutions exist, and are finding applications in almost every type of business. Contents 1 History 1.1 Predecessors 1.2 Emergence of the term project management and modernized techniques 1.3 The first project management products and associations 1.4 SaaS and cloud-based project management software 1.5 Trends 2 Tasks and activities 2.1 Scheduling 2.2 Providing information 3 Types 3.1 Desktop 3.2 Web-based 3.3 Mobile 3.4 Personal 3.5 Single user 3.6 Collaborative 3.7 Visual 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading History  edit  Predecessors  edit  The first historically relevant year for the development of project management software is 1896, marked by the introduction of the Harmonogram. Polish economist Karol Adamiecki attempted to display task development in a floating chart, and laid the foundation for project management software as it is today. 1  1912 was the year when Henry Gantt replaced the Harmonogram with the more advanced Gantt chart, a scheduling diagram which broke ship design tasks down for the purposes of Hoover Dam in early 1931.  citation needed  Todays Gantt charts are almost the same as their original counterparts, and are a part of many project management systems. Emergence of the term project management and modernized techniques  edit  The term project management was not used prior to 1954, when US Air Force General Bernard Adolph Schriever introduced it for military purposes. In the years to follow, project management gained relevance in the business world, a trend which had a lot to do with the formation of the American Association of Engineers AACE 1956, and Rang and DuPonts Critical Path Method calculating project duration ever since 1957. 2  The trend is also related to the appearance of the Program Evaluation Review Technique PERT in 1958. PERT went further with monitoring projects, and enabled users to monitor tasks, being at the same time able to evaluate their quality, and to estimate the time needed to accomplish each of them. As with Gantt charts and CPM, PERT was invented for military purposes, this time for the US Navy Polaris missile submarine program. 3  In 1965, there was a new improvement in project management technology. The US department of defense presented the work breakdown structure WBS to dissolve projects to even smaller visual units, organizing them in hierarchical tree structure. WBS was an inspiration for Winston Royce s Waterfall Method 1970 where management phases are organized in a way which doesnt allow a new task to begin before the previous ones are completed. 4  The first project management products and associations  edit  In the period between 1965 and 1969 were formed two of the leading project management associations the International Project Management Association IPMA in Europe, and the Project Management Institute PMI which trains project management professionals and issues certificates. With business shifting towards technology-based and paperless methods, the first project management systems started to emerge. 5  Oracle and Artemis launched their project managers in 1977, while Scitor Corporation did the same in 1979. 6  7  Many improvements followed in the upcoming decades in 1986, Carnegie Mellon University s Software Engineering Institute introduced capability maturity software, a five-level project management method for rapidly maturing processes, while in 1988 users met earned value management which added processes scope and cost to the schedule. 8  The trend continued with PRINCE2 1996 which increased the number of processes to seven, because of which developers considered designing products for managing complex projects. In 2001, they adopted the Agile project management concept, and focused on adaptive planning and flexible response to changes. In 2006, users were already able to trigger total cost management , a framework that helps controlling and reducing costs in project management. 9  SaaS and cloud-based project management software  edit  The SaaS software-as-a-service trend began in 2008, qualified by users as the most flexible type of project management software for their teams. In 2009, US News classified project management as one of the most demanded skills for obtaining a well-paid job. 10  From 2010 on, the most popular project management solutions were cloud-based, designed for the needs of virtual teams looking to access information from any location or device. 11  12  As a result, 2012 brought the first mobile project management apps users can apply on the go. 13  Trends  edit  With the advent of the Internet-of-Things , project management software was developed to incorporate testing technologies, development tools, and improved cyber security methods. 14  Tasks and activities  edit  Scheduling  edit  One of the most common project management software tool types is scheduling tools. Scheduling tools are used to sequence project activities and assign dates and resources to them. The detail and sophistication of a schedule produced by a scheduling tool can vary considerably with the project management methodology used, the features provided and the scheduling methods supported. Scheduling tools may include support for 15  Multiple dependency relationship types between activities Resource assignment and leveling Critical path Activity duration estimation and probability-based simulation Activity cost accounting Providing information  edit  Project planning software can be expected to provide information to various people or stakeholders, and can be used to measure and justify the level of effort required to complete the projects. Typical requirements might include Overview information on how long tasks will take to complete. Early warning of any risks to the project. Information on workload, for planning holidays. Evidence. Historical information on how projects have progressed, and in particular, how actual and planned performance are related. Optimum utilization of available resource. Cost maintenance. Collaboration with each teammates and customers. Instant communication to collaborators and customers. Types  edit  Desktop  edit  Project management software has been implemented as a program that runs on the desktop of each user. Project management tools that are implemented as desktop software are typically single-user applications used by the project manager or another subject matter expert, such as a scheduler or risk manager. Web-based  edit  Project management software has been implemented as web application to be accessed using a web browser . This may also include the ability to use a smartphone or tablet to gain access to the application. Software as a service SaaS is also web-based and has become a common delivery model for many business applications, including project management, project management information system PMIS and project portfolio management PPM . SaaS is typically accessed by users using a thin client via a web browser. Mobile  edit  In recent years project management software has moved to Mobile devices . In 2015 there are more cell phones than computers in the world 16  , therefore the move of SaaS applications to the mobile devices makes perfect sense. This migration has had the additional benefit of enabling the users to view and update project details on the go. Personal  edit  A personal project management application is one used at home, typically to manage lifestyle or home projects. There is considerable overlap with single user systems, although personal project management software typically involves simpler interfaces. See also non-specialised tools below. Single user  edit  A single-user system is programmed with the assumption that only one person will ever need to edit the project plan at once. This may be used in small companies, or ones where only a few people are involved in top-down project planning. Desktop applications generally fall into this category. Collaborative  edit  A collaborative system is designed to support multiple users modifying different sections of the plan at once for example, updating the areas they personally are responsible for such that those estimates get integrated into the overall plan. Web-based tools, including extranets , generally fall into this category, but have the limitation that they can only be used when the user has live Internet access. To address this limitation, some software tools using clientserver architecture provide a rich client that runs on users desktop computer and replicates project and task information to other project team members through a central server when users connect periodically to the network. Some tools allow team members to check out their schedules and others as read only to work on them while not on the network. When reconnecting to the database, all changes are synchronized with the other schedules. Visual  edit  A common problem in project management is a difficulty with both viewing and understanding large amounts of fluctuating project data. 17  To tackle this, some project management software utilize information visualization , so that users can more easily find, analyze and make changes to their data. To avoid information overload , 18  the visualization mantra of overview first, zoom and filter, then details on demand is often followed. 19  See also  edit  Calendaring software Comparison of project-management software Comparison of development estimation software Capital program and project management software Construction collaboration technology Program Evaluation and Review Technique Project accounting Project Management Information System Software PMIS Project management simulation Project planning Project portfolio management Time-tracking software Workflow management system Online proofing software References  edit   The Harmonogram , projectmanagementhistory.com ,  About UsAACE International The Authority for Total Cost Management , aacei.org ,  PROGRAM EVALUATION AND REVIEW TECHNIQUE PERT , referenceforbusiness.com ,  Breaking Down The Work Breakdown Structure Archived 2016-12-21 at the Wayback Machine , dau.mil ,  Sandro Azzopardi, THE EVOLUTION OF PROJECT MANAGEMENT , projectsmart.co.uk ,  Sandro Azzopardi, Oracles History Innovation, Leadership, Results , oracle.com ,  Metier Artemis , computinghistory.org.uk ,  Technical Report , sei.cmu.edu ,  TOTAL COST MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK Archived 2016-05-30 at the Wayback Machine , aacei.org ,  11 Skills Youll Need for a Career , usnews.com ,  Don Reisinger, 10 Cloud-Based Project Management Tools to Serve Every Companys Needs , eweek.com ,  4 Cloud-Based Project Management Tools to Manage Your Work Better , smallbiztrends.com ,  Margi Murphy, Six free, mobile-friendly project management tools for your business , techworld.com , August 13, 2015  Margi Murphy, The Top Ten Project Management Trends for 2016 , esi-intl.co.uk ,  Nevogt, Dave 17 September 2013. 31 Project Management Solutions . Hubstaff . Retrieved 3 November 2013 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Technology device ownership2015 .  My Problems with Project Management Software  Marketing Technology . Marketing Technology . Retrieved 2016-01-08 .  Wurman, From the book Information Anxiety by Richard Saul Wurman Copyright 1989 by Richard Saul 1989-01-22. INFORMATION OVERLOAD   What to Do When Anxiety Cripples You . Los Angeles Times . ISSN   0458-3035 . Retrieved 2016-01-08 .  Shneiderman, Ben 1996. The Eyes Have It A Task by Data Type Taxonomy for Information Visualizations. University of Maryland, Human Computer Interaction Laboratory . Further reading  edit  Project Time Management. 2008. In A guide to the project management body of knowledge PMBOK guide 4th ed., p.  145. Newtown Square, Pa Project Management Institute. ISBN   978-1933890517 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleProject_management_software oldid908425982  Categories  Project management software Hidden categories Webarchive template wayback links All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2018