Lisp programming language From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Programming language LISP redirects here. For the Internet protocol, see LocatorIdentifier Separation Protocol . For the Japanese girl group , see Lisp group . Lisp Paradigm Multi-paradigm  functional , procedural , reflective , meta Designed  by John McCarthy Developer Steve Russell , Timothy P. Hart, and Mike Levin First  appeared 1958  61  years ago   1958  Typing discipline Dynamic , strong Dialects Arc AutoLISP Clojure Common Lisp Emacs Lisp EuLisp Franz Lisp Hy Interlisp ISLISP LeLisp LFE Maclisp MDL newLISP NIL Picolisp Portable Standard Lisp Racket RPL Scheme SKILL Spice Lisp T Zetalisp Influenced by IPL Influenced CLIPS CLU COWSEL Dylan Elixir Forth Haskell Io Ioke JavaScript Julia 1  Logo Lua ML Nim Nu OPS5 Perl POP-2  11 Python R Rebol Ruby Scala Swift Smalltalk Tcl Wolfram Language 2  Lisp historically LISP  is a family of computer programming languages with a long history and a distinctive, fully parenthesized prefix notation . 3  Originally specified in 1958, Lisp is the second-oldest high-level programming language in widespread use today. Only Fortran is older, by one year. 4  5  Lisp has changed since its early days, and many dialects have existed over its history. Today, the best-known general-purpose Lisp dialects are Clojure , Common Lisp , and Scheme . Lisp was originally created as a practical mathematical notation for computer programs , influenced by the notation of Alonzo Church s lambda calculus . It quickly became the favored programming language for artificial intelligence AI research. As one of the earliest programming languages, Lisp pioneered many ideas in computer science , including tree data structures , automatic storage management , dynamic typing , conditionals , higher-order functions , recursion , the self-hosting compiler , 6  and the readevalprint loop . 7  The name LISP derives from LISt Processor. 8  Linked lists are one of Lisps major data structures , and Lisp source code is made of lists. Thus, Lisp programs can manipulate source code as a data structure, giving rise to the macro systems that allow programmers to create new syntax or new domain-specific languages embedded in Lisp. The interchangeability of code and data gives Lisp its instantly recognizable syntax. All program code is written as s-expressions , or parenthesized lists. A function call or syntactic form is written as a list with the function or operators name first, and the arguments following for instance, a function f that takes three arguments would be called as  f arg1 arg2 arg3  . Contents 1 History 1.1 Timeline 1.2 Connection to artificial intelligence 1.3 Genealogy and variants 1.3.1 Historically significant dialects 1.4 2000 to present 2 Major dialects 2.1 Standardized dialects 3 Language innovations 4 Syntax and semantics 4.1 Symbolic expressions S-expressions 4.2 Lists 4.3 Operators 4.4 Lambda expressions and function definition 4.5 Atoms 4.6 Conses and lists 4.6.1 S-expressions represent lists 4.6.2 List-processing procedures 4.6.3 Shared structure 4.7 Self-evaluating forms and quoting 4.8 Scope and closure 4.9 List structure of program code exploitation by macros and compilers 4.10 Evaluation and the readevalprint loop 4.11 Control structures 5 Examples 6 Object systems 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links History  edit  .mw-parser-output .tmulti .thumbinnerdisplayflexflex-directioncolumn.mw-parser-output .tmulti .trowdisplayflexflex-directionrowclearleftflex-wrapwrapwidth100box-sizingborder-box.mw-parser-output .tmulti .tsinglemargin1pxfloatleft.mw-parser-output .tmulti .theaderclearbothfont-weightboldtext-aligncenteralign-selfcenterbackground-colortransparent width100.mw-parser-output .tmulti .thumbcaptiontext-alignleftbackground-colortransparent.mw-parser-output .tmulti .text-align-lefttext-alignleft.mw-parser-output .tmulti .text-align-righttext-alignright.mw-parser-output .tmulti .text-align-centertext-aligncentermedia all and max-width720px.mw-parser-output .tmulti .thumbinnerwidth100importantbox-sizi ngborder-boxmax-widthnoneimportantalign-itemscenter.mw-parser-output .tmulti .trowjustify-contentcenter.mw-parser-output .tmulti .tsinglefloatnoneimportantmax-width100importantbox-sizingborder-boxtext-aligncenter.mw-parser-output .tmulti .thumbcaptiontext-aligncenter John McCarthy top and Steve Russell John McCarthy developed Lisp in 1958 while he was at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology MIT. McCarthy published its design in a paper in Communications of the ACM in 1960, entitled Recursive Functions of Symbolic Expressions and Their Computation by Machine, Part I. 9  He showed that with a few simple operators and a notation for functions, one can build a Turing-complete language for algorithms. Information Processing Language was the first AI language, from 1955 or 1956, and already included many of the concepts, such as list-processing and recursion, which came to be used in Lisp. McCarthys original notation used bracketed  M-expressions  that would be translated into S-expressions . As an example, the M-expression carconsA,B is equivalent to the S-expression  car  cons A B  . Once Lisp was implemented, programmers rapidly chose to use S-expressions, and M-expressions were abandoned. M-expressions surfaced again with short-lived attempts of MLisp 10  by Horace Enea and CGOL by Vaughan Pratt . Lisp was first implemented by Steve Russell on an IBM 704 computer. Russell had read McCarthys paper and realized to McCarthys surprise that the Lisp eval function could be implemented in machine code . 11  The result was a working Lisp interpreter which could be used to run Lisp programs, or more properly, evaluate Lisp expressions. Two assembly language macros for the IBM 704 became the primitive operations for decomposing lists car  Contents of the Address part of Register number and cdr  Contents of the Decrement part of Register number, 12  where register is used to refer to registers of the computers central processing unit CPU. Lisp dialects still use car and cdr   k r  and   k  d r   for the operations that return the first item in a list and the rest of the list, respectively. The first complete Lisp compiler, written in Lisp, was implemented in 1962 by Tim Hart and Mike Levin at MIT. 13  This compiler introduced the Lisp model of incremental compilation, in which compiled and interpreted functions can intermix freely. The language used in Hart and Levins memo is much closer to modern Lisp style than McCarthys earlier code. Lisp was a difficult system to implement with the compiler techniques and stock hardware of the 1970s. Garbage collection routines, developed by MIT graduate student Daniel Edwards , made it practical to run Lisp on general-purpose computing systems, but efficiency was still a problem.  citation needed  This led to the creation of Lisp machines  dedicated hardware for running Lisp environments and programs. During the 1980s and 1990s, a great effort was made to unify the work on new Lisp dialects mostly successors to Maclisp such as ZetaLisp and NIL New Implementation of Lisp into a single language. The new language, Common Lisp , was somewhat compatible with the dialects it replaced the book Common Lisp the Language notes the compatibility of various constructs. In 1994, ANSI published the Common Lisp standard, ANSI X3.226-1994 Information Technology Programming Language Common Lisp. Timeline  edit  Timeline of Lisp dialects  edit  1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2019  LISP 1, 1.5, LISP 2 abandoned   Maclisp   Interlisp   Lisp Machine Lisp   Scheme  R5RS  R6RS  R7RS small   NIL   Common Lisp   Le Lisp   T   Emacs Lisp   AutoLISP   OpenLisp   PicoLisp   EuLisp   ISLISP   newLISP   Racket   GNU Guile   Visual LISP  Qi, QiII  Shen   Clojure   Arc   LFE   Hy Connection to artificial intelligence  edit  Since inception, Lisp was closely connected with the artificial intelligence research community, especially on PDP-10 14  systems. Lisp was used as the implementation of the programming language Micro Planner , which was used in the famous AI system SHRDLU . In the 1970s, as AI research spawned commercial offshoots, the performance of existing Lisp systems became a growing issue.  citation needed  Genealogy and variants  edit  Over its sixty-year history, Lisp has spawned many variations on the core theme of an S-expression language. Moreover, each given dialect may have several implementationsfor instance, there are more than a dozen implementations of Common Lisp . Differences between dialects may be quite visiblefor instance, Common Lisp uses the keyword defun to name a function, but Scheme uses define . 15  Within a dialect that is standardized, however, conforming implementations support the same core language, but with different extensions and libraries. Historically significant dialects  edit  A Lisp machine in the MIT Museum 4.3 BSD from the University of Wisconsin , displaying the man page for Franz Lisp LISP 1 16   First implementation. LISP 1.5 17   First widely distributed version, developed by McCarthy and others at MIT. So named because it contained several improvements on the original LISP 1 interpreter, but was not a major restructuring as the planned LISP 2 would be. Stanford LISP 1.6 18   This was a successor to LISP 1.5 developed at the Stanford AI Lab , and widely distributed to PDP-10 systems running the TOPS-10 operating system. It was rendered obsolete by Maclisp and InterLisp. MACLISP 19   developed for MITs Project MAC no relation to Apples Macintosh , nor to McCarthy , direct descendant of LISP 1.5. It ran on the PDP-10 and Multics systems. MACLISP would later come to be called Maclisp, and is often referred to as MacLisp. Interlisp 20   developed at BBN Technologies for PDP-10 systems running the TENEX operating system , later adopted as a West coast Lisp for the Xerox Lisp machines as InterLisp-D . A small version called InterLISP 65 was published for the 6502 -based Atari 8-bit family computer line. For quite some time, Maclisp and InterLisp were strong competitors. Franz Lisp  originally a University of California, Berkeley project later developed by Franz Inc. The name is a humorous deformation of the name  Franz Liszt , and does not refer to Allegro Common Lisp , the dialect of Common Lisp sold by Franz Inc., in more recent years. XLISP , which AutoLISP was based on. Standard Lisp and Portable Standard Lisp were widely used and ported, especially with the Computer Algebra System REDUCE. ZetaLisp , also termed Lisp Machine Lisp  used on the Lisp machines , direct descendant of Maclisp. ZetaLisp had a big influence on Common Lisp. LeLisp is a French Lisp dialect. One of the first Interface Builders called SOS Interface 21   was written in LeLisp. Scheme 1975. 22  Common Lisp 1984, as described by Common Lisp the Language  a consolidation of several divergent attempts ZetaLisp, Spice Lisp , NIL , and S-1 Lisp  to create successor dialects 23  to Maclisp, with substantive influences from the Scheme dialect as well. This version of Common Lisp was available for wide-ranging platforms and was accepted by many as a de facto standard 24  until the publication of ANSI Common Lisp ANSI X3.226-1994. Among the most widespread sub-dialects of Common Lisp are Steel Bank Common Lisp SBCL, CMU Common Lisp CMU-CL, Clozure OpenMCL not to be confused with Clojure, GNU CLisp, and later versions of Franz Lisp all of them adhere to the later ANSI CL standard see below. Dylan was in its first version a mix of Scheme with the Common Lisp Object System. EuLisp  attempt to develop a new efficient and cleaned-up Lisp. ISLISP  attempt to develop a new efficient and cleaned-up Lisp. Standardized as ISOIEC 138161997 25  and later revised as ISOIEC 138162007 26  Information technology  Programming languages, their environments and system software interfaces  Programming language ISLISP . IEEE Scheme  IEEE standard, 11781990 R1995 ANSI Common Lisp  an American National Standards Institute ANSI standard for Common Lisp, created by subcommittee X3J13 , chartered 27  to begin with Common Lisp The Language as a base document and to work through a public consensus process to find solutions to shared issues of portability of programs and compatibility of Common Lisp implementations. Although formally an ANSI standard, the implementation, sale, use, and influence of ANSI Common Lisp has been and continues to be seen worldwide. ACL2 or A Computational Logic for Applicative Common Lisp, an applicative side-effect free variant of Common LISP. ACL2 is both a programming language which can model computer systems, and a tool to help proving properties of those models. Clojure , a recent dialect of Lisp which compiles to the Java virtual machine and has a particular focus on concurrency . Game Oriented Assembly Lisp or GOAL is a video game programming language developed by Andy Gavin and the Jak and Daxter team at Naughty Dog . It was written using Allegro Common Lisp and used in the development of the entire Jak and Daxter series of games. 2000 to present  edit  After having declined somewhat in the 1990s, Lisp has experienced a resurgence of interest after 2000. Most new activity has been focused around implementations of Common Lisp , Scheme , Emacs Lisp , Clojure , and Racket , and includes development of new portable libraries and applications. Many new Lisp programmers were inspired by writers such as Paul Graham and Eric S. Raymond to pursue a language others considered antiquated. New Lisp programmers often describe the language as an eye-opening experience and claim to be substantially more productive than in other languages. 28  This increase in awareness may be contrasted to the  AI winter  and Lisps brief gain in the mid-1990s. 29  Dan Weinreb lists in his survey of Common Lisp implementations 30  eleven actively maintained Common Lisp implementations. Scieneer Common Lisp is a new commercial implementation forked from CMUCL with a first release in 2002. The open source community has created new supporting infrastructure CLiki is a wiki that collects Common Lisp related information, the Common Lisp directory lists resources, lisp is a popular IRC channel and allows the sharing and commenting of code snippets with support by lisppaste , an IRC bot written in Lisp, Planet Lisp collects the contents of various Lisp-related blogs, on LispForum users discuss Lisp topics, Lispjobs is a service for announcing job offers and there is a weekly news service, Weekly Lisp News . Common-lisp.net is a hosting site for open source Common Lisp projects. Quicklisp is a library manager for Common Lisp. Fifty years of Lisp 19582008 was celebrated at LISP50OOPSLA. 31  There are regular local user meetings in Boston, Vancouver, and Hamburg. Other events include the European Common Lisp Meeting, the European Lisp Symposium and an International Lisp Conference. The Scheme community actively maintains over twenty implementations . Several significant new implementations Chicken, Gambit, Gauche, Ikarus, Larceny, Ypsilon have been developed in the 2000s decade. The Revised 5 Report on the Algorithmic Language Scheme 32  standard of Scheme was widely accepted in the Scheme community. The Scheme Requests for Implementation process has created a lot of quasi standard libraries and extensions for Scheme. User communities of individual Scheme implementations continue to grow. A new language standardization process was started in 2003 and led to the R 6 RS Scheme standard in 2007. Academic use of Scheme for teaching computer science seems to have declined somewhat. Some universities are no longer using Scheme in their computer science introductory courses 33  34  MIT now uses Python instead of Scheme for its undergraduate computer science program and MITx massive open online course. 35  36  There are several new dialects of Lisp Arc , Hy , Nu , Liskell , and LFE Lisp Flavored Erlang. The parser for Julia is implemented in Femtolisp, a dialect of Scheme Julia is inspired by Scheme, and is often considered a Lisp. Major dialects  edit  Common Lisp and Scheme represent two major streams of Lisp development. These languages embody significantly different design choices. Common Lisp is a successor to Maclisp . The primary influences were Lisp Machine Lisp , Maclisp, NIL , S-1 Lisp , Spice Lisp , and Scheme. 37  It has many of the features of Lisp Machine Lisp a large Lisp dialect used to program Lisp Machines , but was designed to be efficiently implementable on any personal computer or workstation. Common Lisp is a general-purpose programming language and thus has a large language standard including many built-in data types, functions, macros and other language elements, and an object system  Common Lisp Object System . Common Lisp also borrowed certain features from Scheme such as lexical scoping and lexical closures . Common Lisp implementations are available for targeting different platforms such as the LLVM , 38  the Java virtual machine , 39  x86-64, PowerPC, Alpha, ARM, Motorola 68000, and MIPS, 40  and operating systems such as Windows, macOS, Linux, Solaris, FreeBSD, NetBSD, OpenBSD, Dragonfly BSD, and Heroku. 41  Scheme is a statically scoped and properly tail-recursive dialect of the Lisp programming language invented by Guy L. Steele, Jr. and Gerald Jay Sussman . It was designed to have exceptionally clear and simple semantics and few different ways to form expressions. Designed about a decade earlier than Common Lisp, Scheme is a more minimalist design. It has a much smaller set of standard features but with certain implementation features such as tail-call optimization and full continuations  not specified in Common Lisp. A wide variety of programming paradigms, including imperative, functional, and message passing styles, find convenient expression in Scheme. Scheme continues to evolve with a series of standards Revised n Report on the Algorithmic Language Scheme and a series of Scheme Requests for Implementation . Clojure is a recent dialect of Lisp that targets mainly the Java virtual machine , and the Common Language Runtime CLR, the Python VM, the Ruby VM YARV , and compiling to JavaScript . It is designed to be a pragmatic general-purpose language. Clojure draws considerable influences from Haskell and places a very strong emphasis on immutability. 42  Clojure provides access to Java frameworks and libraries, with optional type hints and type inference , so that calls to Java can avoid reflection and enable fast primitive operations. Clojure is not designed to be backwards compatible with other Lisp dialects. 43  Further, Lisp dialects are used as scripting languages in many applications, with the best-known being Emacs Lisp in the Emacs editor, AutoLISP and later Visual Lisp in AutoCAD , Nyquist in Audacity , Scheme in LilyPond . The potential small size of a useful Scheme interpreter makes it particularly popular for embedded scripting. Examples include SIOD and TinyScheme , both of which have been successfully embedded in the GIMP image processor under the generic name Script-fu. 44  LIBREP, a Lisp interpreter by John Harper originally based on the Emacs Lisp language, has been embedded in the Sawfish window manager . 45  Standardized dialects  edit  Lisp has officially standardized dialects R6RS Scheme , R7RS Scheme , IEEE Scheme 46  , ANSI Common Lisp and ISO ISLISP . Language innovations  edit  Lisp was the first language where the structure of program code is represented faithfully and directly in a standard data structurea quality much later dubbed  homoiconicity . Thus, Lisp functions can be manipulated, altered or even created within a Lisp program without lower-level manipulations. This is generally considered one of the main advantages of the language with regard to its expressive power, and makes the language suitable for syntactic macros and metacircular evaluation . A conditional using an ifthenelse syntax was invented by McCarthy in a Fortran context. He proposed its inclusion in ALGOL , but it was not made part of the Algol 58 specification. For Lisp, McCarthy used the more general cond -structure. 47  Algol 60 took up ifthenelse and popularized it. Lisp deeply influenced Alan Kay , the leader of the research team that developed Smalltalk at Xerox PARC  and in turn Lisp was influenced by Smalltalk, with later dialects adopting object-oriented programming features inheritance classes, encapsulating instances, message passing, etc. in the 1970s. The Flavors object system introduced the concept of multiple inheritance and the mixin . The Common Lisp Object System provides multiple inheritance, multimethods with multiple dispatch , and first-class generic functions , yielding a flexible and powerful form of dynamic dispatch . It has served as the template for many subsequent Lisp including Scheme  object systems, which are often implemented via a metaobject protocol , a reflective metacircular design in which the object system is defined in terms of itself Lisp was only the second language after Smalltalk and is still one of the very few languages to possess such a metaobject system. Many years later, Alan Kay suggested that as a result of the confluence of these features, only Smalltalk and Lisp could be regarded as properly conceived object-oriented programming system s. 48  Lisp introduced the concept of automatic garbage collection , in which the system walks the heap looking for unused memory. Progress in modern sophisticated garbage collection algorithms such as generational garbage collection was stimulated by its use in Lisp. 49  Edsger W. Dijkstra in his 1972 Turing Award lecture said, With a few very basic principles at its foundation, it LISP has shown a remarkable stability. Besides that, LISP has been the carrier for a considerable number of in a sense our most sophisticated computer applications. LISP has jokingly been described as the most intelligent way to misuse a computer. I think that description a great compliment because it transmits the ful l flavour of liberation it has assisted a number of our most gifted fellow humans in thinking previously impossible thoughts. 50  Largely because of its resource requirements with respect to early computing hardware including early microprocessors, Lisp did not become as popular outside of the AI community as Fortran and the ALGOL -descended C language. Because of its suitability to complex and dynamic applications, Lisp is enjoying some resurgence of popular interest in the 2010s. 51  Syntax and semantics  edit  Note  This articles examples are written in Common Lisp though most are also valid in Scheme . Symbolic expressions S-expressions  edit  Lisp is an expression oriented language . Unlike most other languages, no distinction is made between expressions and statements   dubious  discuss  all code and data are written as expressions. When an expression is evaluated , it produces a value in Common Lisp, possibly multiple values, which can then be embedded into other expressions. Each value can be any data type. McCarthys 1958 paper introduced two types of syntax Symbolic expressions  S-expressions , sexps, which mirror the internal representation of code and data and Meta expressions  M-expressions , which express functions of S-expressions. M-expressions never found favor, and almost all Lisps today use S-expressions to manipulate both code and data. The use of parentheses is Lisps most immediately obvious difference from other programming language families. As a result, students have long given Lisp nicknames such as Lost In Stupid Parentheses , or Lots of Irritating Superfluous Parentheses . 52  However, the S-expression syntax is also responsible for much of Lisps power the syntax is extremely regular, which facilitates manipulation by computer. However, the syntax of Lisp is not limited to traditional parentheses notation. It can be extended to include alternative notations. For example, XMLisp is a Common Lisp extension that employs the metaobject protocol to integrate S-expressions with the Extensible Markup Language  XML . The reliance on expressions gives the language great flexibility. Because Lisp functions are written as lists, they can be processed exactly like data. This allows easy writing of programs which manipulate other programs  metaprogramming . Many Lisp dialects exploit this feature using macro systems, which enables extension of the language almost without limit. Lists  edit  A Lisp list is written with its elements separated by whitespace , and surrounded by parentheses. For example,  1 2 foo  is a list whose elements are the three atoms 1 , 2 , and foo . These values are implicitly typed they are respectively two integers and a Lisp-specific data type called a symbol, and do not have to be declared as such. The empty list  is also represented as the special atom nil . This is the only entity in Lisp which is both an atom and a list. Expressions are written as lists, using prefix notation . The first element in the list is the name of a function, the name of a macro, a lambda expression or the name of a special operator see below. The remainder of the list are the arguments. For example, the function list returns its arguments as a list, so the expression  list 1 2  quote foo  evaluates to the list  1 2 foo  . The quote before the foo in the preceding example is a special operator which returns its argument without evaluating it. Any unquoted expressions are recursively evaluated before the enclosing expression is evaluated. For example,  list 1 2  list 3 4  evaluates to the list  1 2  3 4  . Note that the third argument is a list lists can be nested. Operators  edit  Arithmetic operators are treated similarly. The expression   1 2 3 4  evaluates to 10. The equivalent under infix notation would be  1  2  3  4 . Lisp has no notion of operators as implemented in Algol-derived languages. Arithmetic operators in Lisp are variadic functions or n-ary , able to take any number of arguments. A C-style  increment operator is sometimes implemented under the name incf giving syntax  incf x  equivalent to setq x  x 1 , returning the new value of x . Special operators sometimes called special forms provide Lisps control structure. For example, the special operator if takes three arguments. If the first argument is non-nil, it evaluates to the second argument otherwise, it evaluates to the third argument. Thus, the expression  if nil  list 1 2 foo    list 3 4 bar   evaluates to  3 4 bar   . Of course, this would be more useful if a non-trivial expression had been substituted in place of nil . Lisp also provides logical operators and , or and not . The and and or operators do short circuit evaluation and will return their first nil and non-nil argument respectively.  or  and zero  nil never   James  task time  will evaluate to James. Lambda expressions and function definition  edit  Another special operator, lambda , is used to bind variables to values which are then evaluated within an expression. This operator is also used to create functions the arguments to lambda are a list of arguments, and the expression or expressions to which the function evaluates the returned value is the value of the last expression that is evaluated. The expression  lambda  arg    arg 1  evaluates to a function that, when applied, takes one argument, binds it to arg and returns the number one greater than that argument. Lambda expressions are treated no differently from named functions they are invoked the same way. Therefore, the expression  lambda  arg    arg 1  5  evaluates to 6 . Here, were doing a function application we execute the anonymous function by passing to it the value 5. Named functions are created by storing a lambda expression in a symbol using the defun macro.  defun foo  a b c d    a b c d   defun f  a  b...  defines a new function named f in the global environment. It is conceptually similar to the expression  setf  fdefinition f     lambda  a   block f b...  Atoms  edit  In the original LISP there were two fundamental data types  atoms and lists. A list was a finite ordered sequence of elements, where each element is either an atom or a list, and an atom was a number or a symbol. A symbol was essentially a unique named item, written as an alphanumeric string in source code , and used either as a variable name or as a data item in symbolic processing . For example, the list  FOO  BAR 1  2  contains three elements the symbol FOO , the list  BAR 1  , and the number 2. The essential difference between atoms and lists was that atoms were immutable and unique. Two atoms that appeared in different places in source code but were written in exactly the same way represented the same object,  citation needed  whereas each list was a separate object that could be altered independently of other lists and could be distinguished from other lists by comparison operators. As more data types were introduced in later Lisp dialects, and programming styles evolved, the concept of an atom lost importance.  citation needed  Many dialects still retained the predicate atom for legacy compatibility ,  citation needed  defining it true for any object which is not a cons. Conses and lists  edit  Main article Cons Box-and- pointer diagram for the list 42 69 613 A Lisp list is implemented as a singly linked list . 53  Each cell of this list is called a cons in Scheme, a pair , and is composed of two pointers , called the car and cdr . These are respectively equivalent to the data and next fields discussed in the article linked list . Of the many data structures that can be built out of cons cells, one of the most basic is called a proper list . A proper list is either the special nil empty list symbol, or a cons in which the car points to a datum which may be another cons structure, such as a list, and the cdr points to another proper list. If a given cons is taken to be the head of a linked list, then its car points to the first element of the list, and its cdr points to the rest of the list. For this reason, the car and cdr functions are also called first and rest when referring to conses which are part of a linked list rather than, say, a tree. Thus, a Lisp list is not an atomic object, as an instance of a container class in C or Java would be. A list is nothing more than an aggregate of linked conses. A variable which refers to a given list is simply a pointer to the first cons in the list. Traversal of a list can be done by cdring down the list that is, taking successive cdrs to visit each cons of the list or by using any of several higher-order functions to map a function over a list. Because conses and lists are so universal in Lisp systems, it is a common misconception that they are Lisps only data structures. In fact, all but the most simplistic Lisps have other data structures, such as vectors  arrays , hash tables, structures, and so forth. S-expressions represent lists  edit  Parenthesized S-expressions represent linked list structures. There are several ways to represent the same list as an S-expression. A cons can be written in dotted-pair notation as  a . b  , where a is the car and b the cdr. A longer proper list might be written  a .  b .  c .  d . nil  in dotted-pair notation. This is conventionally abbreviated as  a b c d  in list notation . An improper list 54  may be written in a combination of the two  as  a b c . d  for the list of three conses whose last cdr is d i.e., the list  a .  b .  c . d  in fully specified form. List-processing procedures  edit  Lisp provides many built-in procedures for accessing and controlling lists. Lists can be created directly with the list procedure, which takes any number of arguments, and returns the list of these arguments.  list 1 2 a 3  Output 1 2 a 3  list 1   2 3  4  Output 1 2 3 4 Because of the way that lists are constructed from cons pairs , the cons procedure can be used to add an element to the front of a list. Note that the cons procedure is asymmetric in how it handles list arguments, because of how lists are constructed.  cons 1   2 3  Output 1 2 3  cons   1 2    3 4  Output 1 2 3 4 The append procedure appends two or more lists to one another. Because Lisp lists are linked lists, appending two lists has asymptotic time complexity O  n  displaystyle On  append   1 2    3 4  Output 1 2 3 4  append   1 2 3      a    5 6  Output 1 2 3 a 5 6 Shared structure  edit  Lisp lists, being simple linked lists, can share structure with one another. That is to say, two lists can have the same tail , or final sequence of conses. For instance, after the execution of the following Common Lisp code  setf foo  list a b c   setf bar  cons x  cdr foo  the lists foo and bar are  a b c  and  x b c  respectively. However, the tail  b c  is the same structure in both lists. It is not a copy the cons cells pointing to b and c are in the same memory locations for both lists. Sharing structure rather than copying can give a dramatic performance improvement. However, this technique can interact in undesired ways with functions that alter lists passed to them as arguments. Altering one list, such as by replacing the c with a goose , will affect the other  setf  third foo  goose  This changes foo to  a b goose  , but thereby also changes bar to  x b goose   a possibly unexpected result. This can be a source of bugs, and functions which alter their arguments are documented as destructive for this very reason. Aficionados of functional programming avoid destructive functions. In the Scheme dialect, which favors the functional style, the names of destructive functions are marked with a cautionary exclamation point, or bangsuch as set-car read set car bang , which replaces the car of a cons. In the Common Lisp dialect, destructive functions are commonplace the equivalent of set-car is named rplaca for replace car. This function is rarely seen however as Common Lisp includes a special facility, setf , to make it easier to define and use destructive functions. A frequent style in Common Lisp is to write code functionally without destructive calls when prototyping, then to add destructive calls as an optimization where it is safe to do so. Self-evaluating forms and quoting  edit  Lisp evaluates expressions which are entered by the user. Symbols and lists evaluate to some other usually, simpler expression  for instance, a symbol evaluates to the value of the variable it names   2 3  evaluates to 5 . However, most other forms evaluate to themselves if entering 5 into Lisp, it returns 5 . Any expression can also be marked to prevent it from being evaluated as is necessary for symbols and lists. This is the role of the quote special operator, or its abbreviation  one quotation mark. For instance, usually if entering the symbol foo , it returns the value of the corresponding variable or an error, if there is no such variable. To refer to the literal symbol, enter  quote foo  or, usually, foo . Both Common Lisp and Scheme also support the backquote operator termed quasiquote in Scheme, entered with the  character  grave accent . This is almost the same as the plain quote, except it allows expressions to be evaluated and their values interpolated into a quoted list with the comma , unquote and comma-at , splice operators. If the variable snue has the value  bar baz  then   foo , snue  evaluates to  foo  bar baz  , while   foo , snue  evaluates to  foo bar baz  . The backquote is most often used in defining macro expansions. 55  56  Self-evaluating forms and quoted forms are Lisps equivalent of literals. It may be possible to modify the values of mutable literals in program code. For instance, if a function returns a quoted form, and the code that calls the function modifies the form, this may alter the behavior of the function on subsequent iterations.  defun should-be-constant    one two three   let  stuff  should-be-constant   setf  third stuff  bizarre   bad  should-be-constant   returns one two bizarre Modifying a quoted form like this is generally considered bad style, and is defined by ANSI Common Lisp as erroneous resulting in undefined behavior in compiled files, because the file-compiler can coalesce similar constants, put them in write-protected memory, etc.. Lisps formalization of quotation has been noted by Douglas Hofstadter in Gdel, Escher, Bach  and others as an example of the philosophical idea of self-reference . Scope and closure  edit  The Lisp family splits over the use of dynamic or static a.k.a. lexical scope . Clojure, Common Lisp and Scheme make use of static scoping by default, while newLISP , Picolisp and the embedded languages in Emacs and AutoCAD use dynamic scoping. Since version 24.1, Emacs uses both dynamic and lexical scoping. List structure of program code exploitation by macros and compilers  edit  A fundamental distinction between Lisp and other languages is that in Lisp, the textual representation of a program is simply a human-readable description of the same internal data structures linked lists, symbols, number, characters, etc. as would be used by the underlying Lisp system. Lisp uses this to implement a very powerful macro system. Like other macro languages such as C , a macro returns code that can then be compiled. However, unlike C macros, the macros are Lisp functions and so can exploit the full power of Lisp. Further, because Lisp code has the same structure as lists, macros can be built with any of the list-processing functions in the language. In short, anything that Lisp can do to a data structure, Lisp macros can do to code. In contrast, in most other languages, the parsers output is purely internal to the language implementation and cannot be manipulated by the programmer. This feature makes it easy to develop efficient languages within languages. For example, the Common Lisp Object System can be implemented cleanly as a language extension using macros. This means that if an application needs a different inheritance mechanism, it can use a different object system. This is in stark contrast to most other languages for example, Java does not support multiple inheritance and there is no reas onable way to add it. In simplistic Lisp implementations, this list structure is directly interpreted to run the program a function is literally a piece of list structure which is traversed by the interpreter in executing it. However, most substantial Lisp systems also include a compiler. The compiler translates list structure into machine code or bytecode for execution. This code can run as fast as code compiled in conventional languages such as C. Macros expand before the compilation step, and thus offer some interesting options. If a program needs a precomputed table, then a macro might create the table at compile time, so the compiler need only output the table and need not call code to create the table at run time. Some Lisp implementations even have a mechanism, eval-when , that allows code to be present during compile time when a macro would need it, but not present in the emitted module. 57  Evaluation and the readevalprint loop  edit  Lisp languages are often used with an interactive command line , which may be combined with an integrated development environment IDE. The user types in expressions at the command line, or directs the IDE to transmit them to the Lisp system. Lisp reads the entered expressions, evaluates them, and prints the result. For this reason, the Lisp command line is called a readevalprint loop  REPL . The basic operation of the REPL is as follows. This is a simplistic description which omits many elements of a real Lisp, such as quoting and macros. The read function accepts textual S-expressions as input, and parses them into an internal data structure. For instance, if you type the text   1 2  at the prompt, read translates this into a linked list with three elements the symbol  , the number 1, and the number 2. It so happens that this list is also a valid piece of Lisp code that is, it can be evaluated. This is because the car of the list names a functionthe addition operation. Note that a foo will be read as a single symbol. 123 will be read as the number one hundred and twenty-three. 123  will be read as the string 123. The eval function evaluates the data, returning zero or more other Lisp data as a result. Evaluation does not have to mean interpretation some Lisp systems compile every expression to native machine code. It is simple, however, to describe evaluation as interpretation To evaluate a list whose car names a function, eval first evaluates each of the arguments given in its cdr, then applies the function to the arguments. In this case, the function is addition, and applying it to the argument list  1 2  yields the answer 3 . This is the result of the evaluation. The symbol foo evaluates to the value of the symbol foo. Data like the string 123 evaluates to the same string. The list  quote  1 2 3  evaluates to the list 1 2 3. It is the job of the print function to represent output to the user. For a simple result such as 3 this is trivial. An expression which evaluated to a piece of list structure would require that print traverse the list and print it out as an S-expression. To implement a Lisp REPL, it is necessary only to implement these three functions and an infinite-loop function. Naturally, the implementation of eval will be complex, since it must also implement all special operators like if or lambda . This done, a basic REPL is one line of code  loop  print  eval  read  . The Lisp REPL typically also provides input editing, an input history, error handling and an interface to the debugger. Lisp is usually evaluated eagerly . In Common Lisp , arguments are evaluated in applicative order leftmost innermost, while in Scheme order of arguments is undefined, leaving room for optimization by a compiler. Control structures  edit  Lisp originally had very few control structures, but many more were added during the languages evolution. Lisps original conditional operator, cond , is the precursor to later if-then-else structures. Programmers in the Scheme dialect often express loops using tail recursion . Schemes commonality in academic computer science has led some students to believe that tail recursion is the only, or the most common, way to write iterations in Lisp, but this is incorrect. All oft-seen Lisp dialects have imperative-style iteration constructs, from Schemes do loop to Common Lisp s complex loop expressions. Moreover, the key issue that makes this an objective rather than subjective matter is that Scheme makes specific requirements for the handling of tail calls , and thus the reason that the use of tail recursion is generally encouraged for Scheme is that the practice is expressly supported by the language definition. By contrast, ANSI Common Lisp does not require 58  the optimization commonly termed a tail call elimination. Thus, the fact that tail recursive style as a casual replacement for the use of more traditional iteration constructs such as do , dolist or loop  is discouraged 59  in Common Lisp is not just a matter of stylistic preference, but potentially one of efficiency since an apparent tail call in Common Lisp may not compile as a simple jump  and program correctness since tail recursion may increase stack use in Common Lisp, risking stack overflow . Some Lisp control structures are special operators , equivalent to other languages syntactic keywords. Expressions using these operators have the same surface appearance as function calls, but differ in that the arguments are not necessarily evaluatedor, in the case of an iteration expression, may be evaluated more than once. In contrast to most other major programming languages, Lisp allows implementing control structures using the language. Several control structures are implemented as Lisp macros, and can even be macro-expanded by the programmer who wants to know how they work. Both Common Lisp and Scheme have operators for non-local control flow. The differences in these operators are some of the deepest differences between the two dialects. Scheme supports re-entrant continuations using the callcc procedure, which allows a program to save and later restore a particular place in execution. Common Lisp does not support re-entrant continuations, but does support several ways of handling escape continuations. Often, the same algorithm can be expressed in Lisp in either an imperative or a functional style. As noted above, Scheme tends to favor the functional style, using tail recursion and continuations to express control flow. However, imperative style is still quite possible. The style preferred by many Common Lisp programmers may seem more familiar to programmers used to structure d languages such as C, while that preferred by Schemers more closely resembles pure-functional languages such as Haskell . Because of Lisps early heritage in list processing, it has a wide array of higher-order functions relating to iteration over sequences. In many cases where an explicit loop would be needed in other languages like a for loop in C in Lisp the same task can be accomplished with a higher-order function. The same is true of many functional programming languages. A good example is a function which in Scheme is called map and in Common Lisp is called mapcar . Given a function and one or more lists, mapcar applies the function successively to the lists elements in order, collecting the results in a new list  mapcar      1 2 3 4 5    10 20 30 40 50  This applies the  function to each corresponding pair of list elements, yielding the result  11 22 33 44 55  . Examples  edit  Here are examples of Common Lisp code. The basic  Hello world  program  print Hello world   Lisp syntax lends itself naturally to recursion. Mathematical problems such as the enumeration of recursively defined sets are simple to express in this notation. Evaluate a numbers factorial   defun factorial  n   if   n 0  1   n  factorial  - n 1  An alternative implementation takes less stack space than the previous version if the underlying Lisp system optimizes tail recursion   defun factorial  n optional  acc 1   if   n 0  acc  factorial  - n 1    acc n  Contrast with an iterative version which uses Common Lisp s loop macro  defun factorial  n   loop for i from 1 to n for fac  1 then   fac i  finally  return fac  The following function reverses a list. Lisps built-in reverse function does the same thing.  defun -reverse  list   let  return-value    dolist  e list   push e return-value  return-value  Object systems  edit  Various object systems and models have been built on top of, alongside, or into Lisp, including The Common Lisp Object System , CLOS, is an integral part of ANSI Common Lisp. CLOS descended from New Flavors and CommonLOOPS. ANSI Common Lisp was the first standardized object-oriented programming language 1994, ANSI X3J13. ObjectLisp 60  or Object Lisp , used by Lisp Machines Incorporated and early versions of Macintosh Common Lisp LOOPS Lisp Object-Oriented Programming System and the later CommonLOOPS Flavors , built at MIT , and its descendant New Flavors developed by Symbolics . KR short for Knowledge Representation, a constraints -based object system developed to aid the writing of Garnet, a GUI library for Common Lisp . Knowledge Engineering Environment KEE used an object system called UNITS and integrated it with an inference engine 61  and a truth maintenance system ATMS. See also  edit  Self-modifying code References  edit   Introduction . The Julia Manual . Read the Docs. Archived from the original on 2016-04-08 . Retrieved 2016-12-10 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Wolfram Language Q A . Wolfram Research . Retrieved 2016-12-10 .  Edwin D. Reilly 2003. Milestones in computer science and information technology . Greenwood Publishing Group. pp.  156157. ISBN   978-1-57356-521-9 .  SICP Foreword . Archived from the original on 2001-07-27. Lisp is a survivor, having been in use for about a quarter of a century. Among the active programming languages only Fortran has had a longer life. Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   Conclusions . Archived from the original on 2014-04-03 . Retrieved 2014-06-04 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   Paul Graham. Revenge of the Nerds . Retrieved 2013-03-14 .  Chisnall, David 2011-01-12. Influential Programming Languages, Part 4 Lisp .  Jones, Robin Maynard, Clive Stewart, Ian December 6, 2012. The Art of Lisp Programming . Springer Science  Business Media. p.  2. ISBN   9781447117193 .  John McCarthy. Recursive Functions of Symbolic Expressions and Their Computation by Machine, Part I . Archived from the original on 2013-10-04 . Retrieved 2006-10-13 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   David Canfield Smith. MLISP Users Manual PDF . Retrieved 2006-10-13 .  According to what reported by Paul Graham in Hackers  Painters , p. 185, McCarthy said Steve Russell said, look, why dont I program this eval  ... and I said to him, ho, ho, youre confusing theory with practice, this eval is intended for reading, not for computing. But he went ahead and did it. That is, he compiled the eval in my paper into IBM 704 machine code, fixing bug , and then advertised this as a Lisp interpreter, which it certainly was. So at that point Lisp had essentially the form that it has today  ...  John McCarthy. LISP prehistory - Summer 1956 through Summer 1958 . Retrieved 2010-03-14 .  Tim Hart and Mike Levin. AI Memo 39-The new compiler PDF . Retrieved 2019-03-18 .  The 36-bit word size of the PDP-6  PDP-10 was influenced by the usefulness of having two Lisp 18-bit pointers in a single word. Peter J. Hurley 18 October 1990. The History of TOPS or Life in the Fast ACs . Newsgroup    alt.folklore.computers . Usenet   84950tut.cis.ohio-state.edu . The PDP-6 project started in early 1963, as a 24-bit machine. It grew to 36 bits for LISP, a design goal.  Common Lisp defun f x x Scheme define f lambda x x or define f x x  McCarthy, J.  Brayton, R.  Edwards, D.  Fox, P.  Hodes, L.  Luckham, D.  Maling, K.  Park, D.  Russell, S. March 1960. LISP I Programmers Manual PDF . Boston , Massachusetts  Artificial Intelligence Group, M.I.T. Computation Center and Research Laboratory . Archived from the original PDF on 2010-07-17. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  Cite journal requires journal  help  Accessed May 11, 2010.  McCarthy, John Abrahams, Paul W. Edwards, Daniel J. Hart, Timothy P. Levin, Michael I. 1985 1962. LISP 1.5 Programmers Manual PDF 2nd ed.. MIT Press . ISBN   0-262-13011-4 .  Quam, Lynn H. Diffle, Whitfield. Stanford LISP 1.6 Manual PDF .  Maclisp Reference Manual . March 3, 1979. Archived from the original on 2007-12-14.  Teitelman, Warren 1974. InterLisp Reference Manual PDF . Archived from the original PDF on 2006-06-02 . Retrieved 2006-08-19 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   Outils de generation dinterfaces   etat de lart et classification by H. El Mrabet  ftppublications.ai.mit.eduai-publicationspdfAIM-349.pdf  permanent dead link   Steele, Guy L., Jr. Purpose . Common Lisp the Language 2nd ed.. ISBN   0-13-152414-3 .  Kantrowitz, Mark Margolin, Barry 20 February 1996. History Where did Lisp come from . FAQ Lisp Frequently Asked Questions 27 .  ISOIEC 138161997 . Iso.org. 2007-10-01 . Retrieved 2013-11-15 .  ISOIEC 138162007 . Iso.org. 2013-10-30 . Retrieved 2013-11-15 .  X3J13 Charter .  The Road To Lisp Survey . Archived from the original on 2006-10-04 . Retrieved 2006-10-13 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   Trends for the Future . Faqs.org . Retrieved 2013-11-15 .  Weinreb, Daniel. Common Lisp Implementations A Survey . Archived from the original on 2012-04-21 . Retrieved 4 April 2012 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   LISP50OOPSLA . Lisp50.org . Retrieved 2013-11-15 .  Documents Standards R5RS . schemers.org 2012-01-11. Retrieved on 2013-07-17.  Why MIT now uses python instead of scheme for its undergraduate CS program . cemerick.com . March 24, 2009 . Retrieved November 10, 2013 .  Broder, Evan January 8, 2008. The End of an Era . mitadmissions.org . Retrieved November 10, 2013 .  MIT EECS Undergraduate Programs . www.eecs.mit.edu . MIT Electrical Engineering  Computer Science . Retrieved 31 December 2018 .  MITx introductory Python course hits 1.2 million enrollments . MIT EECS . MIT Electrical Engineering  Computer Science . Retrieved 31 December 2018 .  Chapter 1.1.2, History, ANSI CL Standard  1 Clasp is a Common Lisp implementation that interoperates with C and uses LLVM for just-in-time compilation JIT to native code.  2 Armed Bear Common Lisp ABCL is a full implementation of the Common Lisp language featuring both an interpreter and a compiler, running in the JVM  3 Archived 2018-06-22 at the Wayback Machine Common Lisp Implementations A Survey  4 Comparison of actively developed Common Lisp implementations  An In-Depth Look at Clojure Collections , Retrieved 2012-06-24  Clojure rational . Retrieved 27 August 2019 . Clojure is a Lisp not constrained by backwards compatibility  Script-fu In GIMP 2.4 , Retrieved 2009-10-29  librep at Sawfish Wikia, retrieved 2009-10-29  IEEE Scheme . IEEE 1178-1990 - IEEE Standard for the Scheme Programming Language . Retrieved 27 August 2019 .  LISP prehistory - Summer 1956 through Summer 1958 . I invented conditional expressions in connection with a set of chess legal move routines I wrote in FORTRAN for the IBM 704 at M.I.T. during 195758  ... A paper defining conditional expressions and proposing their use in Algol was sent to the Communications of the ACM but was arbitrarily demoted to a letter to the editor, because it was very short.  Meaning of Object-Oriented Programming According to Dr. Alan Kay . 2003-07-23. I didnt understand the monster LISP idea of tangible metalanguage then, but got kind of close with ideas about extensible languages  ... The second phase of this was to finally understand LISP and then using this understanding to make much nicer and smaller and more powerful and more late bound understructures  ... OOP to me means only messaging, local retention and protection and hiding of state-process, and extreme late-binding of all things. It can be done in Smalltalk and in LISP. There are possibly other systems in which this is possible, but Im not aware of them.  Lieberman, Henry Hewitt, Carl June 1983, A Real-Time Garbage Collector Based on the Lifetimes of Objects , Communications of the ACM , 26 6 419429, CiteSeerX   10.1.1.4.8633 , doi  10.1145358141.358147  Edsger W. Dijkstra 1972, The Humble Programmer EWD 340 ACM Turing Award lecture.  A Look at Clojure and the Lisp Resurgence .  The Jargon File - Lisp . Retrieved 2006-10-13 .  Sebesta, Robert W. 2012.   2.4 Functional Programming LISP6.9 List Types15.4 The First Functional Programming Language LISP  . Concepts of Programming Languages print 10th ed.. Boston, MA, USA Addison-Wesley. pp.  4752, 281284, 677680. ISBN   978-0-13-139531-2 .  NB a so-called dotted list is only one kind of improper list. The other kind is the circular list where the cons cells form a loop. Typically this is represented using n... to represent the target cons cell that will have multiple references, and n is used to refer to this cons. For instance, 1a b . 1 would normally be printed as a b a b without circular structure printing enabled, but makes the reuse of the cons cell clear. 1a . 1 cannot normally be printed as it is circular, although a... is sometimes displayed, the CDR of the cons cell defined by 1 is itself.  CSE 341 Scheme Quote, Quasiquote, and Metaprogramming . Cs.washington.edu. 1999-02-22 . Retrieved 2013-11-15 .  Quasiquotation in Lisp Archived 2013-06-03 at the Wayback Machine , Alan Bawden  Time of Evaluation - Common Lisp Extensions . Gnu.org. Retrieved on 2013-07-17.  3.2.2.3 Semantic Constraints in Common Lisp HyperSpec  4.3. Control Abstraction Recursion vs. Iteration in Tutorial on Good Lisp Programming Style by Kent Pitman and Peter Norvig , August, 1993.  pg 17 of Bobrow 1986  Veitch, p 108, 1988 Further reading  edit  .mw-parser-output .refbeginfont-size90margin-bottom0.5em.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indentsullist-style-typenonemargin-left0.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indentsulli,.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indentsdlddmargin-left0padding-left3.2emtext-indent-3.2emlist-stylenone.mw-parser-output .refbegin-100font-size100 McCarthy, John 1979-02-12. The implementation of Lisp . History of Lisp . Stanford University . Retrieved 2008-10-17 . Steele, Jr., Guy L. Richard P. Gabriel 1993. The evolution of Lisp PDF . The second ACM SIGPLAN conference on History of programming languages. New York, NY ACM. pp.  231270. ISBN   0-89791-570-4 . Retrieved 2008-10-17 . Veitch, Jim 1998. A history and description of CLOS. In Salus, Peter H ed.. Handbook of programming languages . Volume IV, Functional and logic programming languages first ed.. Indianapolis, IN Macmillan Technical Publishing. pp.  107158. ISBN   1-57870-011-6 . Abelson, Harold  Sussman, Gerald Jay  Sussman, Julie 1996. Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs 2nd ed.. MIT Press. ISBN   0-262-01153-0 . My Lisp Experiences and the Development of GNU Emacs , transcript of Richard Stallman s speech, 28 October 2002, at the International Lisp Conference Graham, Paul 2004. Hackers  Painters. Big Ideas from the Computer Age . OReilly. ISBN   0-596-00662-4 . Berkeley, Edmund C.  Bobrow, Daniel G. , eds. March 1964. The Programming Language LISP Its Operation and Applications PDF . Cambridge, Massachusetts MIT Press. Article largely based on the LISP - A Simple Introduction chapter Berkeley, Edmund C. Sep 1964. THE PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE LISP AN INTRODUCTION AND APPRAISAL . Computers and Automation  1623. Weissman, Clark 1967. LISP 1.5 Primer PDF . Belmont, California Dickenson Publishing Company Inc. External links  edit  Lisp programming language at Wikipedias sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Wikimedia Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity History History of Lisp  John McCarthy s history of 12 February 1979 Lisp History  Herbert Stoyans history compiled from the documents acknowledged by McCarthy as more complete than his own, see McCarthys history links  History of LISP at the Computer History Museum Associations and meetings Association of Lisp Users European Common Lisp Meeting European Lisp Symposium International Lisp Conference Books and tutorials Casting SPELs in Lisp , a comic-book style introductory tutorial On Lisp , a free book by Paul Graham Practical Common Lisp , freeware edition by Peter Seibel Lisp for the web Land of Lisp Let over Lambda Interviews Oral history interview with John McCarthy at Charles Babbage Institute , University of Minnesota, Minneapolis. McCarthy discusses his role in the development of time-sharing at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He also describes his work in artificial intelligence AI funded by the Advanced Research Projects Agency, including logic-based AI LISP and robotics. Interview with Richard P. Gabriel Podcast Resources CLiki the Common Lisp wiki The Common Lisp Directory via the Wayback Machine  archived from the original  Lisp FAQ Index lisppaste Planet Lisp Weekly Lisp News Lisp at Curlie v t e Lisp programming language Features Automatic storage management Conditionals Dynamic typing Higher-order functions Linked lists M-expressions deprecated Readevalprint loop Recursion S-expressions Self-hosting compiler Tree data structures Object systems Common Lisp Object System CLOS CommonLoops Flavors Implementations Technical standards exists Common Lisp Allegro Common Lisp Armed Bear Common Lisp ABCL CLISP Clozure CL CMU Common Lisp CMUCL Corman Common Lisp Embeddable Common Lisp ECL GNU Common Lisp GCL LispWorks Macintosh Common Lisp Mocl Movitz Poplog Steel Bank Common Lisp SBCL Symbolics Common Lisp Scheme History Bigloo Chez Scheme Chicken Gambit Game Oriented Assembly Lisp GOAL Ikarus JScheme Kawa Larceny MITGNU Scheme MultiLisp Pocket Scheme Racket RScheme Scheme 48 SCM SIOD T TinyScheme ISLISP OpenLisp Nonstandard Logo MSWLogo NetLogo StarLogo UCBLogo Apple Dylan Arc AutoLISP BBN LISP Clojure Dylan Emacs Lisp EuLisp Franz Lisp , PC-LISP Hy Interlisp Knowledge Engineering Environment Lisp LeLisp LFE Lisp Machine Lisp Maclisp MDL MLisp newLISP NIL PC-LISP Picolisp Portable Standard Lisp RPL S-1 Lisp SKILL Spice Lisp Zetalisp Operating system Common Lisp Interface Manager , McCLIM Genera Scsh Hardware Lisp machines TI Explorer Community Standards Scheme Requests for Implementation Common Lisp HyperSpec X3J13 Education Books Common Lisp the Language How to Design Programs HTDP On Lisp Practical Common Lisp Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs SICP Curriculum ProgramByDesign Developers Apple Computer Bolt, Beranek and Newman Harlequin Lucid Inc. Massachusetts Institute of Technology MIT MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory CSAIL Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory Symbolics University of California, Berkeley Xanalys People Edmund Berkeley Daniel G. Bobrow William Clinger R. Kent Dybvig Scott Fahlman Matthias Felleisen Robert Bruce Findler Matthew Flatt Phyllis Fox Richard P. Gabriel Paul Graham Richard Greenblatt Timothy P. Hart Louis Hodes Shriram Krishnamurthi Mike Levin David Luckham John McCarthy David A. Moon Robert Tappan Morris David Park Kent Pitman Steve Russell Richard Stallman Guy L. Steele, Jr. Gerald Jay Sussman Julie Sussman Daniel Weinreb Logo Hal Abelson Denison Bollay Wally Feurzeig Brian Harvey Seymour Papert Mitchel Resnick Cynthia Solomon Category Category List v t e John McCarthy Artificial intelligence Circumscription Dartmouth workshop Frame problem Garbage collection Lisp McCarthy Formalism McCarthy 91 function Situation calculus Space fountain v t e Programming languages Comparison Timeline History APL Assembly BASIC C C C COBOL Elixir Fortran Go Groovy Haskell Java JavaScript JS Julia Kotlin Lisp Lua MATLAB Objective-C OCaml Pascal Perl PHP Python R Ruby Rust Scala Shell Smalltalk Swift TypeScript Visual Basic .NET VB.NET more... Category Lists Alphabetical Categorical Generational Non-English-based Authority control BNE  XX535292 BNF  cb11934831x data GND  4035918-9 LCCN  sh85077449 SUDOC  027270394 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleLisp_programming_language oldid913284595  Categories  Academic programming languages American inventions Articles with example Lisp code Dynamically typed programming languages Extensible syntax programming languages Functional languages Lisp programming language Lisp programming language family Programming languages Programming languages created in 1958 Hidden categories CS1 errors deprecated parameters CS1 errors missing periodical All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2010 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2010 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from April 2013 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2008 CS1 long volume value Articles with Curlie links Wikipedia articles with BNE identifiers Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers Wikipedia articles with SUDOC identifiers