Radio-frequency engineering From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search This article needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources   Radio-frequency engineering     news    newspapers    books    scholar    JSTOR  May 2008   Learn how and when to remove this template message  Radio-frequency engineering Occupation Names Radio-frequency engineer Outside Broadcast Radio-frequency engineer Occupation type Profession Description Competencies Technical knowledge, Management skills, Professionalism Education required Mathematics , Physics , Electronics , Information technology Fields of employment Radio , Television , Military Related jobs Technologist , Broadcast engineer , Engineering technician , Technical Operator Radio-frequency engineering , or RF engineering , is a subset of electrical and electronic engineering involving the application of transmission line , waveguide , antenna and electromagnetic field principles to the design and application of devices that produce or utilize signals within the radio band , the frequency range of about 20   kHz up to 300   GHz . 1  2  3  It is incorporated into almost everything that transmits or receives a radio wave , which includes, but is not limited to, mobile phones , radios , Wi-Fi , and two-way radios. RF engineering is a highly specialized field that typically includes the following areas of expertise Design of antenna systems to provide radiative coverage of a specified geographical area by an electromagnetic field or to provide specified sensitivity to an electromagnetic field impinging on the antenna. Design of coupling and transmission line structures to transport RF energy without radiation. Application of circuit elements and transmission line structures in the design of oscillators, amplifiers, mixers, detectors, combiners, filters, impedance transforming networks and other devices. Verification and measurement of performance of radio frequency devices and systems. 4  To produce quality results, the RF engineer needs an in-depth knowledge of mathematics , physics and general electronics theory as well as specialized training in areas such as wave propagation, impedance transformations, filters and microstrip printed circuit board design to name a few. Contents 1 Radio electronics 2 Duties 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Radio electronics  edit  Radio electronics is concerned with electronic circuits which receive or transmit radio signals. Typically, such circuits must operate at radio frequency and power levels, which imposes special constraints on their design. These constraints increase in their importance with higher frequencies. At microwave frequencies, the reactance of signal traces becomes a crucial part of the physical layout of the circuit. List of radio electronics topics RF oscillators  PLL , Voltage-controlled oscillator Transmitters , Transmission lines , RF connectors Antennas , Antenna theory Receivers , Tuners Amplifiers Modulators , Demodulators , Detectors RF filters RF shielding , Ground plane DSSS , Noise power Digital radio Duties  edit  Radio-frequency engineers are specialists in their respective field and can take on many different roles, such as design, installation, and maintenance. Radio-frequency engineers require many years of extensive experience in the area of study. This type of engineer has experience with transmission systems, device design, and placement of antennas for optimum performance. The RF engineer job description at a broadcast facility can include maintenance of the stations high-power broadcast transmitters and associated systems. This includes transmitter site emergency power, remote control, main transmission line and antenna adjustments, microwave radio relay STL  TSL links, and more. In addition, a radio-frequency design engineer must be able to understand electronic hardware design, circuit board material, antenna radiation, and the effect of interfering frequencies that prevent optimum performance within the piece of equipment being developed. See also  edit  Television portal Electronics portal Engineering portal Technology and applied sciences portal Main category Radio electronics Broadcast engineering Mathematics of radio engineering Overlap zone Radio-frequency current SPLAT A software program for visualizing terrain and performing Longley-Rice path loss and coverage prediction using the Irregular Terrain Model. References  edit   A. A. Ghirardi, Radio Physics Course , 2nd ed. New York Rinehart Books, 1932, p. 249  Signal Corps U.S. Army, The Principles Underlying Radio Communication , 2nd ed. Washington, DC U.S.G.P.O., 1922, p. 191  Technical Manual TM 11-665 C-W and A-M Radio Transmitters and Receivers . Dept. of the Army, US Government Printing Office. 1952. p.  2. .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  How to Measure Requirement for RF Equipments . v t e Engineering Civil Architectural Construction Environmental Earthquake Geotechnical Hydraulic Mining Structural Transportation Mechanical Acoustical Aerospace Automotive Marine Railway Thermal Electrical Computer Control Electromechanics Electronics Microwaves Power Radio Frequency Telecommunications Chemical Biochemical Biological Molecular Petroleum Process Reaction Interdisciplinary Audio Biomedical Engineering mathematics Engineering mechanics Engineering physics Engineering science Fire Industrial Information Materials science Ceramics Metallurgy Polymer Mechatronics Military Nanotechnology Nuclear Optical Photonics Privacy Robotics Sanitary Security Software Systems Glossaries Engineering Aerospace engineering Civil engineering Electrical and electronics engineering Mechanical engineering Structural engineering List of engineering branches CategoryEngineering Engineering portal External links  edit  Practical Guide to Radio-Frequency Analysis and Design Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleRadio-frequency_engineering oldid909149231  Categories  Radio spectrum Radio technology Waves Electromagnetic spectrum Broadcast engineering Electrical engineering Electronic engineering Broadcasting occupations Engineering occupations Hidden categories Articles needing additional references from May 2008 All articles needing additional references