Applied mechanics From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia    Redirected from Engineering mechanics  Jump to navigation Jump to search This article includes a list of references , but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations . Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.  January 2015   Learn how and when to remove this template message  Part of a series of articles about Classical mechanics F   m a  displaystyle vec Fmvec a Second law of motion History Timeline Branches Applied Celestial Continuum Dynamics Kinematics Kinetics Statics Statistical Fundamentals Acceleration Angular momentum Couple DAlemberts principle Energy kinetic potential Force Frame of reference Inertial frame of reference Impulse Inertia   Moment of inertia Mass Mechanical power Mechanical work Moment Momentum Space Speed Time Torque Velocity Virtual work Formulations Newtons laws of motion Analytical mechanics Lagrangian mechanics Hamiltonian mechanics Routhian mechanics HamiltonJacobi equation Appells equation of motion UdwadiaKalaba equation Koopmanvon Neumann mechanics Core topics Damping   ratio  Displacement Equations of motion Eulers laws of motion Fictitious force Friction Harmonic oscillator Inertial   Non-inertial reference frame Mechanics of planar particle motion Motion   linear  Newtons law of universal gravitation Newtons laws of motion Relative velocity Rigid body dynamics Eulers equations Simple harmonic motion Vibration Rotation Circular motion Rotating reference frame Centripetal force Centrifugal force reactive Coriolis force Pendulum Tangential speed Rotational speed Angular acceleration   displacement   frequency   velocity Scientists Galileo Huygens Newton Kepler Horrocks Halley Euler dAlembert Clairaut Lagrange Laplace Hamilton Poisson Daniel Bernoulli Johann Bernoulli Cauchy v t e Applied mechanics also engineering mechanics  is a branch of the physical sciences and the practical application of mechanics . Pure mechanics describes the response of bodies solids and fluids or systems of bodies to external forces . Some examples of mechanical systems include the flow of a liquid under pressure , the fracture of a solid from an applied force, or the vibration of an ear in response to sound . A practitioner of the discipline is known as a mechanician . Applied mechanics describes the behavior of a body, in either a beginning state of rest or of motion, subjected to the action of forces. 1  Applied mechanics, bridges the gap between physical theory and its application to technology . It is used in many fields of engineering , especially mechanical engineering and civil engineering . In this context, it is commonly referred to as Engineering Mechanics . Much of modern engineering mechanics is based on Isaac Newton s laws of motion while the modern practice of their application can be traced back to Stephen Timoshenko , who is said to be the father of modern engineering mechanics. Within the practical sciences, applied mechanics is useful in formulating new ideas and theories, discovering and interpreting phenomena, and developing experimental and computational tools. In the application of the natural sciences , mechanics was said to be complemented by thermodynamics , the study of heat and more generally energy , and electromechanics , the study of electricity and magnetism . 2  Contents 1 In practice 2 Major topics 3 Applications 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links In practice  edit  The advances and research in Applied Mechanics has wide application in many fields of study. Some of the specialties that put the subject into practice are Mechanical Engineering , Construction Engineering , Materials Science and Engineering , Civil Engineering , Aerospace Engineering , Chemical Engineering , Electrical Engineering , Nuclear Engineering , Structural engineering and Bioengineering . Prof. S. Marichamy said that Mechanics is the study of bodies which are in motion or rest condition under the action of Forces. Major topics  edit  Acoustics Analytical mechanics Computational mechanics Contact mechanics Continuum mechanics Dynamics mechanics Elasticity physics Experimental mechanics Fatigue material Finite element method Fluid mechanics Fracture mechanics Laws of Mechanics Quantum Mechanics Mechanics of materials Mechanics of structures Rock mechanics Rotordynamics Solid mechanics Soil mechanics Statics Stress wave Viscoelasticity Applications  edit  Electrical Engineering Civil engineering Mechanical Engineering Nuclear engineering Architectural engineering Chemical engineering Petroleum engineering See also  edit  Biomechanics Geomechanics Mechanicians Mechanics Physics Principle of moments Structural analysis Kinetics physics Kinematics Dynamics physics Statics References  edit   Engineering Mechanics statics and dynamics - Dr.N.Kottiswaran .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em ISBN   978-81-908993-3-8  Thermodynamics - and the Free Energy of Chemical Substances . Lewis, G. and M. Randall 1923 Further reading  edit  J.P. Den Hartog , Strength of Materials , Dover, New York, 1949. F.P. Beer , E.R. Johnston, J.T. DeWolf, Mechanics of Materials , McGraw-Hill, New York, 1981. S.P. Timoshenko, History of Strength of Materials , Dover, New York, 1953. J.E. Gordon , The New Science of Strong Materials , Princeton, 1984. H. Petroski, To Engineer Is Human , St. Martins, 1985. T.A. McMahon and J.T. Bonner, On Size and Life , Scientific American Library, W.H. Freeman, 1983. M. F. Ashby , Materials Selection in Design , Pergamon, 1992. A.H. Cottrell, Mechanical Properties of Matter , Wiley, New York, 1964. S.A. Wainwright, W.D. Biggs, J.D. Organisms , Edward Arnold, 1976. S. Vogel, Comparative Biomechanics , Princeton, 2003. J. Howard, Mechanics of Motor Proteins and the Cytoskeleton , Sinauer Associates, 2001. J.L. Meriam, L.G. Kraige. Engineering Mechanics Volume 2 Dynamics , John Wiley  Sons., New York, 1986. J.L. Meriam, L.G. Kraige. Engineering Mechanics Volume 1 Statics , John Wiley  Sons., New York, 1986. External links  edit  Video and web lectures Engineering Mechanics Video Lectures and Web Notes Applied Mechanics Video Lectures By Prof.SK. Gupta, Department of Applied Mechanics, IIT Delhi Authority control NDL  00569005 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleApplied_mechanics oldid911540269  Categories  Mechanics Engineering mechanics Structural engineering Hidden categories Articles lacking in-text citations from January 2015 All articles lacking in-text citations Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers