Dartmouth ALGOL 30 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search This article needs more complete citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding missing citation information so that sources are clearly identifiable. Citations should include title, publication, author, date, and for paginated material the page numbers. Several templates are available to assist in formatting. Improperly sourced material may be challenged and removed.  May 2017   Learn how and when to remove this template message  Dartmouth ALGOL 30 was a 1960s-era implementation, firstly of the ALGOL 58 programming language, then of ALGOL 60 for the LGP-30 at Dartmouth College , hence the name. Since the limited size of the LGP-30 precluded a full implementation of ALGOL 60, certain of its features arrays called by value, own arrays, strings, variable array bounds, and recursion were omitted but the implementers did include parameters called by name, using  thunks , 1  and integer labels. They dubbed their work ALGOL 30, since it was for the LGP-30. 2  From this project emerged a small group of undergraduate students who were well equipped to perform further work in the development of computer languages. For instance, one student  Stephen J. Garland  discovered that compound statements and blocks could be included in the Samelson and Bauer scanning algorithm. This simple fact was not published until some years later. 3  The ALGOL 30 system suffered one defect that hindered its wide use as a student-oriented language it was a two-pass system. The intermediate code was similar to relocatable binary, but had to be punched onto paper tape. Compilations could be batched, but the delays between presenting the source code tape and the final execution were too great to allow widespread student use. It was clear that a load-and-go system was needed. Thus was born SCALP, a Self Contained ALgol Processor  Kurtz, 1962c, Oct. References  edit   Ingerman, 1961 Irons and Wally Feurzeig , 1961  Kurtz, 1962a, Feb., 1962b, Mar.  The author has been unable to identify the source that he clearly remembers the closest is Gries, 1968. Thomas Eugene Kurtz , SIGPLAN Notices 1404, April 1979, including The first ACM SIGPLAN conference on History of programming languages HOPL, Los Angeles, CA, June 13, 1978. This programming-language -related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it . v t e Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleDartmouth_ALGOL_30 oldid879767937  Categories  Dartmouth College history ALGOL 60 dialect Systems programming languages Procedural programming languages Programming language topic stubs Hidden categories All articles with incomplete citations All pages needing cleanup All stub articles