Project team From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search A project team is a team whose members usually  quantify  belong to different groups, have different functions and are assigned by the project manager to activities for the same project . A team can be divided  by whom  into sub-teams according to need. Usually project teams are only used  by whom  for a defined period of time. They are disbanded  by whom  after the project is deemed  by whom  complete. Due to the nature of the specific formation and disbandment, project teams are usually in organizations . A team in this context is defined as an interdependent collection of individuals who work together towards a common goal and who share responsibility for specific outcomes of their organizations. 1  An additional requirement to the original definition is that the team is identified as such by those within and outside of the team. 2  As project teams work on specific projects, the first requirement is usually met. In the early stages of a project, the project team may not be recognized as a team, leading to some confusion within the organization. The central characteristic of project teams in modern organizations is the autonomy and flexibility availed in the process or method undertaken to meet their goal s. Most  quantify  project teams require involvement from more than one department, therefore most project teams can be classified as cross-functional teams . The project team usually consists of a variety of members often working under the direction of a project manager or of a senior member of the organization. Projects that may not receive strong support initially often have the backing of a project champion . Individual team-members can either be involved on a part-time or full-time basis. Their time commitment can change throughout the project depending on the project development stage . Project teams need to have the right combination of skills, abilities and personality types to achieve collaborative tension . 3  Teams can be formulated in a variety of ways. The most common method is at the discretion of a senior member of the organization. There are many components to becoming a top-performing team, but the key is working on highly cooperative relationship.  citation needed  The job of management is to foster a relaxed and comfortable atmosphere where members can be themselves and are engaged and invested in the project work. All team members are encouraged for relationship building.  citation needed  Each member is responsible to give constructive feedback, recognize,value and utilize unique strengths of each other. The whole team is tuned  by whom  on trust and cooperation. 4   need quotation to verify  See also  edit  Resource calendar Resource allocation References  edit   Sundstrom, E. de Meuse, K. P. Futrell, D. 1990. Work teams Applications and effectiveness. American Psychologist . 45 2 120133. doi  10.10370003-066x.45.2.120 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  West, B., Borril, C. S.,  Unsworth, K. L. 1998. Team effectiveness in organizations. In C. L. Copper  I. T. Robertson Eds., International Review of Industrial and Organizational Psychology , 13, 1-48.  Bond-Barnard, Taryn Jane Fletcher, Lizelle Steyn, Herman 2018-05-08. Linking trust and collaboration in project teams to project management success . International Journal of Managing Projects in Business . doi  10.1108IJMPB-06-2017-0068 . ISSN   1753-8378 .  Agile Project Management External links  edit  Project Team Building Articles Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleProject_team oldid909901580  Categories  Project management Teams Hidden categories All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2019 Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from August 2019 Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from August 2019