Regulation and licensure in engineering From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia    Redirected from Professional Engineer  Jump to navigation Jump to search This article includes a list of references , but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations . Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.  August 2018   Learn how and when to remove this template message  Regulation and licensure in engineering is established by various jurisdictions of the world to encourage public welfare, safety, well-being and other interests of the general public and to define the licensure process through which an engineer becomes authorized to practice engineering andor provide engineering professional services to the public. As with many other professions, the professional status and the actual practice of professional engineering is legally defined and protected by law in some jurisdictions. Additionally, some jurisdictions permit only licensed engineers sometimes called registered engineers to practice engineering, which requires careful definition in order to resolve potential overlap or amb iguity with respect to certain other professions which may or may not be themselves regulated e.g. scientists, or architects. Relatedly, jurisdictions that license according to particular engineering discipline need to define those boundaries carefully as well so that practitioners understand what they are permitted to do. In many cases, only a state or provincial licensedregistered engineer has the authority to take legal responsibility for engineering work or projects typically via a seal or stamp on the relevant design documentation. Regulations may require that only a licensed or registered engineer can sign, seal or stamp technical documentation such as reports, plans, engineering drawings and calculations for study estimate or valuation or carry out design analysis, repair, servicing, maintenance or supervision of engineering work, process or project. In cases where public safety, property or welfare is concerned, it may be required that an engineer be licensed or registered   though some jurisdictions have an industrial exemption that permits engineers to work internally for an organization without licensure so long as they are not making final decisions to release product to the public or offering engineering services directly to the public e.g. consultant. Expert witness or opinion in courts or before government committees or commissions can be provided by experts in the respective field, which is sometimes given by a registered or licensed engineer in some jurisdictions. Contents 1 Registration and regulation 1.1 United States 1.1.1 History 1.1.2 Requirements 1.2 Canada 1.3 United Kingdom 1.4 India 1.5 Iran 1.6 Pakistan 1.7 Sri Lanka 1.8 Europe 1.8.1 Germany 2 Designations 2.1 Africa 2.2 Australia and New Zealand 2.3 Asia 2.4 Europe 2.5 Latin America 2.6 North America 3 Title usage 3.1 Canada 3.2 United States 3.3 United Kingdom 3.4 Europe and Latin America 3.5 International professional bodies 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Registration and regulation Becoming an engineer is a process that varies widely around the world. In some regions, use of the term engineer is regulated, in others it is not. Where engineering is a regulated profession, there are specific procedures and requirements for obtaining a registration, charter or license to practice engineering. These are obtained from the government or a charter-granting aut hority acting on its behalf and engineers are subject to regulation by these bodies. 1  In addition to licensure, there are voluntary certification programs for various disciplines which involve examinations accredited by the Council of Engineering and Scientific Specialty Boards. 2  Due to occupational closure , licensed engineers enjoy significant influence over their regulation. They are often the authors of the pertinent codes of ethics used by some of these organizations. 1  Engineers in private practice most often find themselves in traditional professional-client relationships in their practice. Engineers employed in government service and government-run industry are on the other side of that relationship. Despite the different focus, engineers in industry and private practice face similar ethical issues and reach similar conclusions. 3  One American engineering society, the National Society of Professional Engineers , has sought to extend a single professional license and code of ethics for all engineers, regardless of practice area or employment sector. 4  United States In the United States, registration or licensure of professional engineers and engineering practice is governed by the individual states. Each registration or license is valid only in the state where it is granted. Some licensed engineers maintain licenses in more than one state. Comity , also known as reciprocity, between states allows engineers who are licensed or registered in one state to obtain a license in another state without meeting the ordinary rigorous proof of qualification by testing. This is accomplished by the second state recognizing the validity of the first states licensing or registration process. 5  History Licensure in the United States began in the State of Wyoming when lawyers, notaries and others without engineering training were making poor quality submissions to the state for permission to use state water for irrigation. Clarence Johnson, the Wyoming state engineer, presented a bill in 1907 to the state legislature that required registration for anyone presenting themselves as an engineer or land surveyor and created a board of exami ners. Charles Bellamy, a 52-year-old engineer and mineral surveyor then became the first licensed professional engineer in the United States. After enactment, Johnson would wryly write about the effect of the law, saying, A most astonishing change took place within a few months in the character of maps and plans filed with the applications for permits. Louisiana , followed by Florida and Illinois , would become the next states to require licensure. Montana became the last state to legislate the licensing in 1947. 6  Requirements Requirements for licensing vary, but generally are as follows 7  Graduate from an Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology ABET-accredited four-year college or university program with a degree in engineering e.g., Bachelor of Engineering, Bachelor of Science in Engineering, Master of Science in Engineering, Master of Engineering or in some states, graduate from an ABET-accredited four-year college or university program with a degree in engineering technology. Complete a standard Fundamentals of Engineering FE written examination, which tests applicants on breadth of understanding of basic engineering principles and, optionally, some elements of an engineering speciality. Completion of the first two steps typically qualifies applicants for certification in the United States as an engineer in training EIT, sometimes also called an engineer intern EI. 8  Accumulate a certain amount of engineering experience in most states the requirement is four years, but it is lower in some. For engineering technology graduates, the required number of years may be higher. Complete a written Principles and Practice in Engineering PE examination, which tests the applicants knowledge and skills in their chosen engineering discipline civil, electrical, industrial, mechanical, etc., as well as engineering ethics . For standardization, FE and PE exams are written and graded by a central organization, the National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying NCEES. However, each states board of professional engineers individually sets the requirements to take the exams, as well as the passing score. For example, applicants in some states must provide professional references from several PEs before they can take the PE exam. There is a fairly large range in exam pass rates for FE and PE exams, but the pass rate for repeat test t akers is significantly lower. 9  All 50 states and the District of Columbia have engineering boards that are represented on the NCEES, which administers both the FE and PE examinations. 10  Degree requirements in the United States are evolving. Effective January 1, 2020, the NCEES model will require additional credits beyond a Bachelor of Science in Engineering degree. NCEES is developing the types of creditable activities that will satisfy the additional educational requirement. This has received some support from civil engineers. 11  12  As of 2013, it is still possible for an individual to bypass Steps No. 2 and 4. In Texas, for example, both FE and PE exam waivers are still available to individuals with several years of creditable experience. 13  14  In a few states, it is still possible for an individual to bypass Step No. 1 and apply to take the registration examinationsas long as a PE sponsors the applicantbecause work experience can be substituted for academic experience. The requirement for years of experience may also vary. For example, in California it is possible to take a PE examination with only two years of exp erience after a Bachelor of Science in Engineering degree or one year of experience after a Master of Engineering. In other states candidates may take one of the PE exams directly through NCEES, in some cases immediately after graduation, but they still must wait until obtaining the required experience before obtaining a license. Some states also have state-specific examination s. California requires two additional exams in land surveying and earthquake engineering for civil engineering candidates and many states have exams based on their individual laws and ethics requirements. Some states issue generic professional engineering licenses. Others, known as discipline states, issue licenses for specific disciplines of engineering, such as civil engineering, mechanical engineering, nuclear engineering , electrical engineering and chemical engineering . However, in all cases engineers are ethically required to limit their practice to their area of competency, which is usually a small portion of a discipline. While licensing boards do not often enforce this limitation, it can be a factor in negligence lawsuits. In a few states, licensed civil engineers may also perform land survey work. In addition to the persons license, most states require that firms providing engineering services are authorized to do so. For instance, the state of Florida issues a certificate of authorization to firms that are owned by a professional engineer. Civil engineers account for a large portion of licensed professional engineers. In Texas, for example, about 37 percent of licenses are for civil engineers, with civil engineering exams making up more than half of the exams taken. 15  16  Many of the remainder are mechanical , electrical and structural engineers. However, some engineers in other fields obtain licenses for the ability to serve as professional witnesses in courts, before government committees or just for prestigeeven though they may never actually sign and seal design documents. Since regulation of the practice of engineering is performed by the individual states in the United States, areas of engineering involved in interstate commerce are essentially unregulated. These areas include much of mechanical , aerospace and chemical engineering and may be specifically exempted from regulation under an industrial exemption. An industrial exemption covers engineers who design products such as automobiles that are sold or have the potential to be sold outside the state where they are produced, as well as the equipment used to produce the product. Structures subject to building codes are not covered by an industrial exemption, though small residential buildings often do not require an engineers seal. In some jurisdictions, the role of architects and structural engineers overlap. In general, the primary professional responsible for designing habitable buildings is an architect. The architect signs and seals design plans for buildings and other structures that humans may occupy. A structural engineer is contracted to provide technical structural design ensuring the stability and safety of the overall structure, however, no states currently allo w engineers the ability to perform professional architecture without also being licensed as an architect. 17  Many private companies employ non-degree workers in technical positions with engineering titles such as test engineer or field engineer. At the companys discretion, as long as the company does not offer engineering services directly to the public or other businesses, such positions may not require an engineering license. However, it is important to make a distinction between a graduate engineer and a professional engineer. A graduate engineer is anyone holding a degree in engineering from an accredited four-year university program, but is not licensed to practice or offer services to the public. Unlicensed engineers usually work as employees for a company or as professors in engineering c olleges, where they are governed under the industrial exemption clause. Canada The practice of engineering in Canada is highly regulated under a system of licensing administered by a self regulated engineering association in each province. In Canada the designation professional engineer can only be used by licensed engineers and the practice of engineering is protected in law and strictly enforced in all provinces. The regulation and licensing of engineers is done through each provinces own engineering association which was created by acts passed by that provinces legislature . There is also Engineers Canada which regulates undergraduate programs for engineering. The process for registration is generally as follows Graduate with a degree from an accredited program in engineering or applied science, accredited by the Canadian Engineering Accreditation Board CEAB. Complete an engineer-in-training EIT or engineering internship program under the direction of a professional engineer. With the exception of Quebec, this is a minimum four-year program. 18  Review of work experience by the association. Pass a professional practice exam, 19  the content and format of which differs by province. Professional engineers are not licensed in a specific discipline but are bound by their respective provincial code of ethics e.g. in Ontario Professional Engineers Act R.R.O. 1990, Regulation 941 from practicing beyond their training and experience. Breaches of the code are often sufficient grounds for enforcement measures, which may include the suspension or loss of license and financial penalties. It could also result in serving time jail, should negligence be shown to have played a part in any incident that causes loss of human life. Engineers are not tested on technical knowledge during the licensing process if their education was accredited by the CEAB. Accreditation of schools and their accredited degree granting status are monitored and controlled. This accreditation process is governed by Engineers Canada through their active group CEAB. The accreditation process is continuous and enforced through regular accreditation reviews of each school. These reviews typically include the review of the schools curriculum including marked final exams and assignments, interviews of current students, extracurricular activities and teaching staff as well additional areas the visiting board may feel need addressing. The spe cific areas considered are curriculum content, program environment and general criteria. The associations are granted both an exclusive right to title and an exclusive right to practice. There are only a few exceptions specifically noted in the actswhich do not include any industrial exemptions. Therefore, a professional engineer is legally required to be registered. The lev el of enforcement varies depending on the specific industry. And, in some provinces, there is no requirement of having graduated from an accredited Canadian university in order to be a professional engineer. The professional engineers license is only valid in the province of delivery. There are, however, agreements between the associations to ease mobility. In 2009, professional engineers Ontario led an initiative to develop a national engineering licensing framework. The term engineer is often used loosely in some Canadian industry sectors to describe people working in the field of engineering technologynot professional engineeringas engineering technologists or engineering technicians and trades names such as stationary engineer. For example, the Canadian Coast Guard and the Canadian Navy often calls its technicians marine engineers, power engineers and military engineers internally, but not in the public domain. The term locomotive engineer has been an integral part of the Canadian railroad since its inception.  Stationary engineering  is a trade whose technicians operate heavy machinery and equipment that provide heat, light, climate control and power. United Kingdom Main article Chartered Engineer UK  In general there is no restriction on the right to practise as an engineer in the UK. However there are a small number of areas of work, generally safety related, which are reserved by statute, regulations or industry standards to licensed or otherwise approved persons.  20  The title engineer is not regulated, but certain engineering titles are. There is no system for licensing, but registers are held of qualified persons. The Engineering Council is the UK regulatory body for its engineering profession. It holds the national registers of 235,000 engineers registered as EngTech engineering technicians, ICTTech information and communications technology technicians, IEng incorporated engineers and CEng chartered engineers. These titles are fully protected under law by means of the Engineering Councils Royal Chart er and By-Laws. In order to protect these titles, action is taken through the courts against their unauthorized use. To receive designation as a CEng, it is required to have approved education typically to Masters level and also demonstrate significant technical and commercial leadership and management competencies. 21  A chartered engineer is entitled to register through the European Federation of National Engineering Associations FEANI as a European Engineer and use the pre-nominal designation Eur Ing. 20  India In India, engineers with a bachelors or masters degree in engineering or technology from a university are allowed to practice as consulting engineersThey must be licensed or registered with municipalities in order to submit public plans, designs or drawings for approval and record. The Institution of Engineers India was granted British Royal Charter in 1935 and admits engineers holding the above degrees as a corporate member AMIE or chartered engineer India CEng India. IEIndia also offers registration as a professional engineer PE India and international professional engineer PE Intl to member-engineers having seven years of active practical engineering experience after achieving their degrees. IEIndia is a member of IPEA International Professional Engineers Agreement with bilateral agreements with many national, foreign and in ternational engineering institutions. Many municipalities exempt chartered engineers PEIndia or PE Intl from their licenser or registration, by reciprocity  comity . All such consulting engineers must be licensed, registered or chartered regardless of their discipline or area of practice. Iran In Iran , registration or licensure of professional engineers and engineering practice is governed by Ministry of Science, Research and Technology Iran . For standardization, FE and PE exams are written and graded by a central organization, the National Organization for Examination and Training NOET which is known as Sanjesh in Persian . 22  Requirements for licensing are as follows Graduate from accredited four-year college or university program with a degree in engineering e.g., Bachelor of Engineering , Bachelor of Science in Engineering . Complete a standard Fundamentals of Engineering FE written examination, which tests applicants on breadth of understanding of basic engineering principles and, optionally, some elements of an engineering speciality. Accumulate a certain amount of engineering experience requirement is at least four years. Complete a written Principles and Practice in Engineering PE examina tion, which tests the applicants knowledge and skills in their chosen engineering discipline  civil , electrical , industrial , mechanical , computer , etc., as well as engineering ethics. 23  Pakistan In Pakistan , engineering education and profession is regulated by the Pakistan Engineering Council PEC via PEC Act 1976. PEC is a federal government organization. Any person with an engineering degree  BEBSBSc Engineering  from PEC accredited universitiesinstitutes is legally allowed to register with the Pakistan Engineering Council PEC with two categories. Registered engineer RE and professional engineer PE. Previously, every engineering graduate registered with the PEC and at least five years of relevant work experience was eligible for the title of professional engineer PE without any exam. To improve the quality of engineering profession, a two-tier system has been introduced via PEC CPD Bye-L aws 2008. This system was realistically implemented starting 10 July 2010. Graduate engineers now enroll and practice as registered engineer RE in their general discipline of work. After at least five years of relevant work experience and accumulation of at least 17 CPD Continued Professional Development points, they may attempt the Engineering Practice Examination EPE co nducted by the PEC. EPE is held by PEC biennially in major cities across the country. Those who pass the EPE are given the prestigious title of professional engineer PE in their specialized discipline of work. PEC unilaterally honors the Engineers Mobility Forum EMFInternational Professional Engineers Agreement IPEA. An engineer already registered as a professional engineer with EMFIPEA will be exempt from EPE  CPD points requirement and will be awarded professional engineer PE title on submission of application. This has been made possible through clause 13 h of PEC CPD Bye-Laws 2008. To improve the quality of engineering services, engineers with professional engineer PE status are also required to engage in CPD activities in order to be able to retain their PE license. CPD p oints are awarded for various developmental activities such as formal education e.g. Postgraduate diploma , master or PhD, on-job experience, participating in conferencesworkshops as audience, speaker or organizer, publications in technical journals, part-time teaching activities, serving as guest lecturer other than full-time teaching and serving as external examiner for masterPhD thesis. For CPD points system, upper limit of points has also been implemented to prevent abuse of the system and encourage balanced participation in various CPD activities. In case of on-job work experience which is the primary engagement of engineering profession, one CPD point is awarded for 400 hours of work. Upper limit of 2 credit points per year has been established for on-job w ork experience. Rewarding only 800 hours 4 months full-time of work per year has many benefits including inherent tolerance for bouts of unemployment, in-built allowance for sicknessdiseaseinjury, discouraging workaholism, enabling full-time engineering teachers to gain relevant field experience with reduced time commitment e.g. part-time consulting engagement and encour aging participation in other CPD activities which further the engineering profession e.g. guest lectures, publishing research, authoring a book and social work for engineers under recognized engineers associations. To avoid confusion, PEC CPD Bye-Laws 2008 introduced the legal term registered person. Registered person is a term distinct from registered engineer RE. It is a blanket term used for all persons enrolled with PEC in any capacity   whether as registered engineers RE or professional engineers PE. Sri Lanka In Sri Lanka, the title engineer is not regulated. However, as per the Engineering Council Act No 4 of 2017 , all engineering practitioners in Sri Lanka needs to be registered with the engineering council to practice. Failing do to so would result in an offence and can be convicted by a summary trial before a Magistrate with imprisonment period not exceeding one year andor a fine not exceeding one hundred thousand rupees. Europe The European Engineer Eur Ing, EUR ING is an international professional qualification for engineers used in many European countries. The title is granted after successful application to a national member of the European Federation of National Engineering Associations FEANI, which includes representation from many European countries, including much of the European Union . It allows a person who has an engineering degree and usually an engineering professional qualification in one of the member countries to use the qualification in others, but this depends on local legislation. The title Eur Ing is  pre-nominal , i.e., it is placed before rather than after the name as in the case of a post-nominal title such as those for academic degrees however, in some EU countries, academic degrees are also pre-nominal. Names are also placed on the FEANI Register maintained by FEANI in addition to national member registers. Another association in Europe is the EurEta . The professional title Ing. EurEta is used as a pre-nominal similar to Dr. or Prof. An engineer registered with EurEta European Higher Engineering and Technical Professionals Association is called an EurEta Registered Engineer, and has the right to use this title in Europe. 24  Germany In Germany academic title Dipl.-Ing.  Diplom-Ingenieur , diploma engineer is awarded by the educational ministries of the federal states  Bundeslnder  after having completed an academic engineering education according to the German engineers law  Ingenieurgesetz  however, it is not a license to practice engineering, rather an academic title. The degrees Ing. grad.  graduierter Ingenieur , graduate engineer and Obering.  Oberingenieur , supervisor engineer are no longer awarded. The designation Dipl.-Ing. is recognized by FEANI as a precursor for registration as Eur Ing. Dipl.-Ing. does not confer licensing by the government and therefore is not equivalent to the steps of licensing e.g., mandatory references, minimum work experience and a second theoretical and practical exam conducted in other coun tries such as the UK, Canada or the United States. State-certified engineer German staatlich geprfter Techniker  is a European Union qualification for a professional engineer of technology or professional engineering technologist not to be confused with an engineering technician or Dipl.-Ing. It is granted to engineering technologists upon successful completion of a technical college and it is also granted by an international organization with headquarters in Germany, the  BVT , Federal Association of Higher Professions for Technology, Economy and Design  Bundesverband hherer Berufe der Technik, Wirtschaft und Gestaltung e.V. . EU Directive 2005L0036-EN 01.01.2007 ANNEX III List of regulated education and training referred to in the third subparagraph of Article 132 25  A member of the BVT is entitled to use the initials BVT after his name. To achieve this qualification, it is required to complete a 42-month apprenticeship program, a minimum 2,400 hour college diploma in engineering or technology, two years of relevant experience and pass the state examination. The academic requirement to be a state-certified engineer is a degree equivalent to level 6 on EQF  bachelor on the European Qualification Framework. A bachelors honours degree in engineering or engineering technology from an accredited university is also equated to level 6 on EQF. A state-certified engineer is not required to complete a university degree. Before Jan. 31, 2012, a state-certified engineer certificate usually qualified the holder to proceed to bachelors level educa tion at a university of applied science. In the past, this led to wide and controversial discussions between bachelors and masters degrees engineers and state-certified engineers. Today, this is on the same level as a bachelors degree. One can continue to study to a masters degree with the SCE qualification. The academic requirements for qualification are similar to incorporated engineer qualificationregistration by EC UK. State-certified engineers now assist engineers with only a diploma or masters degree. They are also holding full engineering posi tions as systems engineers, integration engineers, test engineers, QA engineers, etc. State-certified engineer, business manager and designer levels are now a level 6Bachelor on DQF and EQF, as of Jan. 31, 2012. The following top representatives and agents institutions were involved federal government Federal Ministry for Education and Research, Federal Ministry of Economics and Technology, standing conference and economic ministerial meeting of countries, t he Confederation of German Employers Associations, German Chambers of Industry and Commerce, German Trade Union Federation and the Federal Institute for Vocational Application. They agreed on a common position on the implementation of the EQF, as a German qualifications framework DQR. Designations Letters after or before a persons name post-nominal or pre-nominal letters are commonly used to denote the holder of an engineering license in various jurisdictions Africa Ing . in Ghana for engineers holding a BSc or higher with relevant engineering experience and a registered member of the Ghana Institute of Engineers  GhIE  Pr Eng . or Pr Ing is used as a post-nominal in South Africa for engineers holding a BEng, BSc.Eng. or B.Ing. with relevant experience. Pr.Cert.Eng standing for professional certificated engineer is used as a post-nominal for engineers who have registered with Engineering Council of South Africa after passing the Engineers Certificate of Competence Examinations. R.Eng standing for registered engineer in Kenya Holders of five years of post-secondary engineering education and four years of work experience. Eng . is used for engineers holding the Bachelor of Science, Bachelor of Engineering or higher with relevant engineering experience in Egypt and must be a member in the Egyptian Syndicate of Engineers. Engr is used as a pre-nominal in Nigeria for holders of bachelor or higher degree in engineering with relevant experience and having successfully passed the Nigerian Society of Engineers NSE Professional Exams and fulfill other NSE and Council for Regulation of Engineering in Nigeria COREN requirements 26  R.Eng or CEng is used as post-nominal for registered engineers in Nigeria after fulfilling both NSE and COREN requirements. Eng is used as a pre-nominal in Uganda for registered engineers. In Uganda, a registered engineer must as a prerequisite be a member of the Uganda Institution of professional engineers UIPE and must have a Bachelor of Science or higher in engineering together with relevant engineering experience that must be documented, supported by two registered engineers and defended by the applicant in an interview with the Engineers Registration Board ERB, which has the power to confirm designation as a registered engineer. Annual fees must be paid to the ERB by all registered engineers. 27  Australia and New Zealand RPEng , is used as a post-nominal in Australia for Registered Professional Engineers only and subject to a rigorous competence based assessment and ongoing CPD requirements to maintain status. 28  RPEng is administered by Professionals Australia . NER , administered by Engineers Australia, is used as a post-nominal in Australia for technologists, associates and professional engineers registered on the National Engineering Register and is subject to CPD requirements to maintain status. Registration is performed by Engineers Australia. 29  RPEQ is used as a post-nominal in Queensland for registered professional engineers of Queensland and is subject to CPD requirements 30  to maintain status. Registration and monitoring is performed by the Board of Professional Engineers of Queensland. 31  The assessment entities for the Board can be found here. 1 . MIEAust is used as a post-nominal to designate a member of Engineers Australia . This indicates at least three years experience beyond graduation, but does not imply chartered membership by itself. CPEng is used as a post-nominal in Australia and New Zealand for chartered professional engineers and subject to a rigorous competence based assessment and ongoing CPD requirements to maintain status. FIEAust is used to designate a fellow highest membership category of Engineers Australia. Graduate Engineer is an official designation under Australian Legislation Professional Employees Award 2010 that covers graduated engineering students of a suitable engineering course. 32  Professional Engineer and Experienced Engineer are official designations under Australian Legislation Professional Employees Award 2010 for engineers that carry out professional engineering duties and are a member of Engineers Australia or are a graduate engineer with 4 years experience with professional engineering duties or are who have not graduated from a university course, but are an engineer with five years expe rience carrying out professional engineering duties as would be the case for autodidactic and industry-trained engineers. 32  Asia Mohandess Payeh 1 and Mohandess Payeh 2 are titles used respectively for professional engineer and engineer-in-training in Iran . Ir is used as a pre-nominal in Hong Kong, Malaysia and Indonesia . Er is used as a pre-nominal in Singapore and P.E.P.Eng.  professional engineer  are used as post-nominal designations. P.E.Jp as a pre-nominal in Japan. Engr . or engineer is allowed before your name only if you have membership in IEB, in Bangladesh . R.E. and P.E. are used as post-nominal designations for engineers in Pakistan registered with the Pakistan Engineering Council PEC after completing a four years Bachelor of EngineeringBachelor of Science in Engineering degree. R.E.  registered engineer  and P.E.  professional engineer  Mohandes is used as a pre-nominal in Arab countries like Iraq , Syria and Lebanon . Eng . or . as a pre-nominal in Jordan for engineers holding a university degree in engineering after five years of studies. Engr. or engineer is used as a pre-nominal in the Philippines for individuals passing the government regulated professional licensure examination, which is only given for certain fields of engineering. CEng Sri Lanka is used in Sri Lanka as a post-nominal abbreviation by corporate members of the Institution of Engineers, Sri Lanka IESL. IEng . The term incorporated engineers is offered by the Institution of Incorporated Engineers, Sri Lanka . CEng India is used as post-nominal abbreviation in India by those who are registered as a chartered engineer with Institution of Engineers India. Er is used before their name by chartered engineers who hold the IE India designation, in India.  is used in Israel mostly by masters degree civil engineers. Europe Eur Ing European engineer in Europe, used as a pre-nominal similar to Dr. or Prof. after being suitably registered in their own country and then accepted by FEANI. Ing.P.Eur European professional engineer in Europe, used as a pre-nominal. Ing .  ingeniero  in Spain, used as a pre-nominal, for the engineers who have the equivalent to a masters degree as they studied five or six courses in an engineering superior school. There also exists an ingeniero tcnico  I.T. , who is a professional that holds a degree and a minimum formation of three courses in an engineering official college. Both types of engineers have full competency in their respective professional field of engineering, being the difference that the three-year engineers have competence only in their specialty mechanical, electrical, chemical, etc. and the engineering superior school engineers have wider competences . The Bologna process changes this structure. The degree will require four courses and the superior engineering school engineers will equal the ones that hold a masters in engineering. Eng .  Engenheiro  in Portugal, used as a pre-nominal. An engenheiro is a full chartered professional in engineering who was awarded a masters degree 2nd study cycle according to the Bologna process system by an accredited engineering school. In Portugal there is also the engenheiro tcnico who is a professional with a bachelors degree first study cycle in engineering or engineering sciences. Accredited masters degrees in engineering are regulated and certified by the Ordem dos Engenheiros Order of Engineers and every professional full chartered engineer is registered at the Ordem. In Finland, regulation affects only academic degrees. In academic education, the degree of diplomi-insinri  dipl. ins. or DI , officially translated Master of Science Technology, is awarded by universities and universities of technology and is preceded by an intermediate bachelors degree  tekniikan kandidaatti  or equivalent studies. In vocational education, the degrees insinri and ylempi insinri amk are awarded by polytechnics . In Germany the Dipl.-Ing .  Diplom-Ingenieur , diploma engineer is awarded by the educational ministries of the federal states  Bundeslnder  after having completing an academic engineering education according to the German engineers law  Ingenieurgesetz . The degrees Ing. grad.  graduierter Ingenieur , graduate engineer and Obering.  Oberingenieur , supervisor engineer are no longer awarded.  pre-nominal letters  Ing. EurEta is used as a pre-nominal similar to Dr. or Prof. An engineer registered with EurEta European Higher Engineering and Technical Professionals Association is called an EurEta Registered Engineer and has the right to use this title in Europe. 33  State-certified Engineer BVT . These titles are the respective translations authorized by the German Federal Government of staatlich geprfter Techniker in Europe. 34  Ir . in the Netherlands for engineers holding a masters degree from a university or Ing . for engineers holding a bachelors degree from a professional school.  pre-nominal letters  Ir . in Belgium for civil engineers holding a masters degree in engineeringbio-engineering sciences from a university or Ing . for industrial engineers holding a masters degree in applied engineering , formerly from university colleges, from 2013 these formations are integrated in the universities.  pre-nominal letters  Ing . in Italy used as a pre-nominal for engineers holding a masters degree  or Ing.jr for engineers holding a bachelors degree. A state exam is required.  pre-nominal letters  Registration is with the Consiglio Nazionale degli Ingegneri. Siv. Ing . sivilingenir, Master of Science and ing. hyskoleingenir, Bachelor of Science in Norway. The title is used by persons holding degrees from accredited engineering colleges and universities. CEng chartered engineer and IEng incorporated engineer in the UK and Ireland. UK and Irish engineers may also carry post-nominal letters specific to their specialist engineering institute, such as MIET professional engineers and graduate professionals registered with the Institution of Engineering and Technology . In the UK these are recognized as regulated qualifications and titles. 35  Civ. Ing . in Sweden for engineers holding a masters degree in engineering, Master of Engineering, Master of Science in Engineering and hgskoleingenjr in Sweden for engineers holding a Bachelor of Science degree. Cand.polyt . in Denmark for engineers holding a masters degree in engineering, Master of Engineering, Master of Science in Engineering. 36  Ing . in Romania, used as a pre-nominal similar to Dr. or Prof.. Ing . for engineers holding a masters degree in Czech Republic and Slovak republic , used as a pre-nominal similar to Mgr.  MSc. in . and mgr in. in Poland, in., inynier  engineer  is the title obtained after 3,5 years of technical studies inynier who obtained MSc degree, uses mgr in.  magister inynier , literally master engineer . The mgr degree can be obtained in two years post-graduate education or formerly until full adaptation of the Bologna process by university through an integrated five-year Bachelor of ScienceMaster of Science program. Some particularly in the U.S. mistakenly believe that mgr in. is some kind of separate degree, while in fact these are two degrees, regardless of how they were obtained. The degree in general includes license to practice, although some regulation may require additional registration to perform specific tasks see pre-nominal letters . .  . Mag. Inzh. from magister master engineer  in Bulgaria for engineers holding a masters magister degree or . for engineers holding a bachelors degree.  pre-nominal letters   In . in Malta for engineers holding a university degree and at least three years of experience.  PEng UK in UK for engineers who are members of Society of Professional Engineers UK.  BVT in Germany for engineers holding three-and-a-half years of certified apprenticeship, followed by a minimum of a 2,400-hour degree and a minimum of two years of approved relevant experience, members of the federal Association of Higher Professionals for Technology, Economy and Design.  Mh.  or  Mhendis  in Turkey . The titled is used by persons holding a degree from four years of study in accredited engineering universities.     Diploma owner in Engineering or  . .  in Greece is the title that is used by persons holding a five years of study degree from a public engineering university. This separates them from simple engineers having four years of studies in Greek TEI Technical Educational Institutes. Latin America Ing. in most Spanish speaking countries  pre-nominal letters  similar to Dr. or Prof Argentina , Bolivia , Colombia , Dominican Republic , Ecuador , El Salvador , Honduras , Mxico , Per , Uruguay , Venezuela. In Chile customary practice consists in placing the post-nominal term ingeniero civil plus the specialty area, such as ingeniero civil elctrico , ingeniero civil en minera or ingeniero civil qumico . Eng.  engenheiro  customary practice in post-nominal terms such as engenheiro civil, engenheiro mecnico, engenheiro electricista, engenheiro florestal, engenheiro agrnomo, engenheiro de segurana do trabalho in Brazil. Registration by CONFEACREA in the federation states of Par, Maranho, Tocantins, So Paulo and others but to work in more than one state is possible only with visto. R.Eng. registered engineer in Trinidad and Tobago , as accredited by the Board of Engineering of Trinidad and Tobago. North America PE or P.E. is used in the United States. Individual states grant PE registration, which can sometimes be endorsed by other states. P.Eng. is used in Canada, including the province of Quebec . This is granted to specified technical educational degree holders residing in Canada, upon application and approval. Eng. French ing.  is used in Quebec professional engineers in Quebec may use either Eng., P.Eng. or ing., which are all equivalent. Title usage In many countries, laws exist that limit the use of job titles containing the word engineer. Canada In Canada it is illegal to practice engineering or use the title professional engineer or engineer, without a license. There are two exceptions stationary engineer and power engineer. Engineering in Canada is regulated in the public interest by self-governing professional licensing bodies. These bodies were established by Canadas 13 provincial and territorial governments through legislation. The provincial and territorial governments have delegated their constitutional authority to regulate engineers and engineering in Canada to profess ional licensing bodies that are maintained and governed by the profession, creating a system of self-regulation. The first law related to professional engineering in Ontario was created in 1922 and allowed for the creation of a voluntary association to oversee registration of engineers. The Act of 1922 was open, meaning that membership in the association was not mandatory for practising engineers. In Ontario, regulation of engineering practice dates to 1937, when the Professional Engine ers Act was amended and the engineering profession was closed to non-qualified individuals that is, licensure was made mandatory for anyone practising professional engineering. The provincial government determined that it would be in the public interest to restrict the practice of engineering to those who were qualified and the right to practice was closed to non-engineers as a result of the failures of bridges and buildings, which had been designed by unskilled individuals. Canadian provinces legally allow engineers to self-regulate their profession. The licensing bodies fulfil this mandate by ensuring standards of engineering practice and education in Canada, by setting standards for admission into the profession, by disciplining engineers who fail to uphold the professions practice and ethical standards and by preventing the misuse of the title professional engineer by individuals who are not licensed members of the profession. They also take appropriate action to prevent the illegal practice of engineering by unlicensed individuals. Each licensing bodys mandate and obligation to undertake this role is laid out in the act that created it. Although each act is slightly different, most also define a scope of practice for engineers and specifically restrict the use of the title professional engineer to individuals who have been licensed by the engineering licensing body in the province or territory where the act applies. The use of the term engineer was an issue between professional bodies, the IT industry and the security industry, where companies or associations may issue certifications or titles with the word engineer as part of that title such as security engineer or Microsoft Certified Systems Engineer . Microsoft has since changed the title to Microsoft Certified IT Professional. Several licensing bodies for professional engineering contend that only licensed professional engineers are legally allowed to use the title engineer. The IT industry, on the other hand, counters that These title holders never presented themselves as professional engineers Provincial laws, other than in Quebec and Ontario, regulate only the use of term professional engineer and not any title with the word engineer in Quebec and Ontario, the term engineer is protected by both the Engineers Act 37  and by Section 32 of the Professional Code 38  The IT industry has used the term engineer since the dawn of the computing industry in the 60s. 39  Court rulings regarding the usage of the term engineer have been mixed. For example, after complaints were lodged by the Canadian Council of Professional Engineers , a court in Quebec fined Microsoft Canada 1,000 for misusing the engineer title by referring to MCSE graduates as engineers. 40  Conversely an Alberta court dismissed the lawsuit filed by The Association of Professional Engineers, Geologists and Geophysicists of Alberta APEGGA against Raymond Merhej for using the title system engineer, claiming that, The respondents situation is such that it cannot be contended that the public is likely to be deceived, confused or jeopardized by his use of the ter m... 41  APEGGA also lost the appeal to this decision. 42  The Canadian Information Processing Society, 43  and in particular CIPS Ontario, 44  have attempted to strike a balance between the professional engineering licensing bodies and the IT industry over the use of the term engineer in the software industry, but so far no major agreements or decisions have been announced. Additional confusion has taken place over similarly-named occupations. One such example is power engineers or stationary engineers. Graduates of a two-year college level power engineering technology program in Nova Scotia may use the title power engineer or stationary engineer. This conflicts with the title often used in the electrical industry for professional engineers who de sign related equipment and can cause confusion. United States In the United States, the practice of professional engineering is highly regulated and the title professional engineer is legally protected, meaning that it is unlawful to use it to offer engineering services to the public unless permission, certification or other official endorsement is specifically granted by that state through a professional engineering license. Also, many states prohibit unlicensed persons from calling themselves an engineer or indicating branches or specialties not covered by the licensing acts. 45  46  47  Employees of state or federal agencies may also call themselves engineers if that term appears in their official job title. The IEEE s formal position on this is as follows The title, engineer and its derivatives should be reserved for those individuals whose education and experience qualify them to practice in a manner that protects public safety. Strict use of the title serves the interest of both the IEEE-USA and the public by providing a recognized designation by which those qualified to practice engi neering may be identified. Every state regulates the practice of engineering to ensure public safety by granting only Professional Engineers PEs the authority to sign and seal engineering plans and offer their services to the public. 48  There are additional requirements to include at least one professional engineer within the firm for these type of companies to include the word engineering in the title of the business, although these requirements are not universal. In the United States an industrial exemption allows businesses to employ employees and call them an engineer, as long as such individuals are under the direct supervision and control of the business entity and function internally related to manufacturing manufactured parts related to the business entity or work internally within an exempt organization. Such person does no t have the final authority to approve or the ultimate responsibility for, engineering designs, plans or specifications that are to be A incorporated into fixed works, systems or facilities on the property of others or B made available to the public. These individuals are prohibited from representing an ability or willingness to perform engineering services or make an engi neering judgment requiring a licensed professional engineer, engage in practice of engineering, offer engineering services directly to the public andor other businesses unless the business entity is registered with the states board of engineering and the practice is carried onsupervised directly only by engineers licensed to engage in the practice of engineering. 45  Examples are sanitation engineer , production engineer , test engineer , network engineer , project engineer , systems engineer and sales engineer . These are often seen in engineering job advertisements online and in news papers. Most of the advertisements and employers dont require licensing because these positions do not pose a direct threat to public health or pose a liability danger. The US model has generally been only to require the practicing engineers offering engineering services that impact the public welfare, safety or safeguarding of life, health or property to be licensed, while engineers working in private industry without a direct offering of engineering services to the public or other businesses, education and government need not be licensed. In the United States, use of the title professional engineer is restricted to those holding a professional engineers license. These people have the right to add the letters PE after their names on resumes, business cards and other communication. However, each state has its own licensing procedure and the license is valid only in the state that granted it. Therefore, many profe ssional engineers maintain licenses in more than one state. Comity, also known as reciprocity, between states allows engineers who are licensed or registered in one state to obtain a license in another state without meeting the ordinary rigorous proof of qualification by testing. This is accomplished by the second state recognizing the validity of the first states licensing or registration process. Other uses of the term engineer are legally controlled and protected to varying degrees, dependent on the state and the enforcement of its engineering certification board. The term is frequently applied to fields where practitioners may have no engineering background or the work has no basis in the physical engineering disciplines for example sanitation engineer . 49  With regard to the term software engineer, many states, such as Texas and Florida, have introduced license requirements for such a title that are in line with the requirements for more traditional engineering fields. United Kingdom There is no restriction on anyone describing themselves as an engineer or working as an engineer in the UK. The word engineer has a broad sense and can refer to multiple different jobs associated with engineering. 50  Specific titles, however, are protected. In addition to professional engineering titles, these include Registered Gas Engineer 51  and Chief Engineer Class 1 or 2 Fishing Vessel . 52  53  The Engineering Council grants the titles Chartered Engineer , Incorporated Engineer , Engineering Technician and Information and Communications Technology Technician under its royal charter. These titles are protected under civil law. 54  The Engineering Council is also the UK member of the International Professional Engineers Agreement and awards the title of International Professional Engineer UK . 55  Various engineering institutions grant their own professional titles in addition to those granted by the Engineering Council. These include Chartered Chemical Engineer  Institution of Chemical Engineers , Chartered Civil Engineer  Institution of Civil Engineers , Chartered Energy Engineer and Chartered Petroleum Engineer  Energy Institute , Chartered Gas Engineer  Institution of Gas Engineers and Managers , Chartered Marine Engineer  Institute of Marine Engineering, Science and Technology , Chartered Structural Engineer and Member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers  Institution of Structural Engineers , and Member of the Institution of Engineering and Technology  Institution of Engineering and Technology . 56  Europe and Latin America Regulation and titling of engineers in Europe are handled differently by various countries. In Germany and some other European and Latin American countries, the term diploma engineer implies that the person has completed typically one year of academic work beyond the basic Bachelor of Engineering degree and completed a major academic project, similar to a masters thesis. Therefore, a diploma engineer is a university degree and not a professional registration or licen se. However, in Germany and most other countries where the diploma engineer degree exist, there is no professional registration or license in engineering with a very limited number of exceptions, such as civil engineering in Germany. For this reason, graduates holding these degrees are generally allowed to use the legally protected title of engineer within these countries. In Germany the usage of the term engineer  Ingenieur  as such, not just the Diplom-Ingenieur , is protected by various Lnder  states of Germany  lawsbecause education matters are governed by the legislation of the Lnder , not the federal government. Although the details of the laws vary, they all properly restrict the usage of the term. Examples of such laws are listed in the endnotes. 57  58  59  In France, the title engineer is used liberally and is often attributed based on professional position rather than initial qualification. However, the title ingnieur diplom diploma engineer is reserved for people having followed one of the trainings listed by the Commission des Titres dIngnieur  Commission for Engineer Titles . It corresponds to a highly selective masters degree level. In Turkey title is limited by law for the people with an engineering degree from accredited engineering universities. Usage of the title by others even those with much more work experience is illegal and punishable by law. In Chile , the ingeniero engineer title is regulated by law, which distinguishes at least three different kinds of professional engineering titles. First, the igeniera de ejecucin, which only requires a degree in applied science and a technical degree from a university or a technical institute usually four years total. Second, ingeniera, which requires a major degree in basic sci ences plus a technical degree, both from a university usually five years total. Third, ingeniera civil, which requires an academic major degree in basic sciences, a minor degree in applied sciences and a technical degree, all from a university usually six or six and a half years total. In all cases, the term refers to a professional degree conceded by an educational instit ution, yet it can only be given by certain institutions when all legal requirements are met. In Brazil , the title of engenheiro engineerand in Argentina , 60  the title of ingenierocan only be legally used by someone with a five- or six-year engineering degree. In Argentina most universities have a five- or six-year engineering degree Around 3,5004,000 hours of classes or approx. 240250 credits, where one credit equals 16 contact hours. Both countries concede the degree most commonly through universities and sometimes through c ertain institutions. In Puerto Rico , use of the title ingeniero engineer is restricted to those holding an engineers license registered by the Puerto Rico Professional College of Engineers and Land Surveyors . These people have the right to add the letters Ing. before their names on resumes, business cards and other communication. International professional bodies The AACE , a professional body for cost engineers, explains why a technical engineering background is not required for their profession with the following statement 61   The skills and knowledge required to deal with costs e.g., cost estimating, planning and scheduling, etc. are quite different from those required to deal with the physical design dimension. From that difference, the field of cost engineering was born. Cost engineering practitioners work alongside of and are peers with engineers, software analysts, play producers, architects a nd other creative career fields to handle the cost dimension, but they do not necessarily have the same background. Whether they have technical, operations, finance and accounting or other backgrounds, cost engineering practitioners need to share a common understanding, based on scientific principles and techniques, with the engineering or other creative career functions.  See also American Society of Civil Engineers Civil Engineering Body of Knowledge FIDIC Hong Kong Institution of Engineers Institution of Electronics and Telecommunication Engineers Institution of Engineers disambiguation Institution of Mechanical Engineers Engineering New Zealand Engineers Australia Society of Operations Engineers Washington Accord References  a b Layton, Edwin 1986. The Revolt of the Engineers Social Responsibility and the American Engineering Profession . Baltimore, Maryland, USA The Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN   0-8018-3287-X . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em pp. 67  A Primer on Credentials for Engineering and Related Fields . cesb.org . Retrieved 2016-01-18 .  NSPE. NSPE Ethics in Employment Task Force Report . Archived from the original on 2006-09-27 . Retrieved 2006-10-20 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  Cite journal requires journal  help   Layton 1986. pp. 238239.  Licensure by Comity . National Society of Professional Engineers. 2008 . Retrieved 2008-03-14 .  McGuirt, Doug June 2007. The Professional Engineering Century PDF . Professional Engineer . National Society of Professional Engineers  2429. Archived from the original PDF on July 16, 2017 . Retrieved July 7, 2018 .  Model Law php . National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying. 2009 . Retrieved 2010-05-05 .  59 Okla. Stat. Sec. 475.12. Retrieved 16 August 2006 from Oklahoma state board of licensure for professional engineers and land surveyors Archived 2006-09-21 at the Wayback Machine .  NCEES . Exam Pass Rates . Retrieved 2010-07-10 .  PE exam .  American Society of Civil Engineers ASCE 2001 Academic Prerequisites for Licensure and Professional Practice . Policy Statement 465 Archived 2006-10-28 at the Wayback Machine .  American Council of Engineering Companies ACEC 2007 White Paper on Implementation of Additional Engineering Education Requirements as a Prerequisite for Licensure, Archived copy PDF . Archived from the original PDF on 2011-09-03 . Retrieved 2011-03-22 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  CS1 maint archived copy as title  link   Exam Waiver Requirements . Texas Board of Professional Engineers. 2013 . Retrieved 2013-08-21 .  httpsections.asme.orgnwhssTBPEMay04-Licensing.pdf  permanent dead link   Texas PE License Information Roster . Texas Board of Professional Engineers. 2013 . Retrieved 2013-08-21 .  Examination PassFail Rates . Texas Board of Professional Engineers. 2013 . Retrieved 2013-08-21 .  AIA Statutory Matrix on the Legal Relationships Between the Professions of Architecture and Engineering PDF . AIA Website . American Institute of Architects. Archived from the original PDF on 10 October 2015 . Retrieved 6 March 2016 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   A Cheminement permis PDF .  permanent dead link   Archived copy . Archived from the original on 2011-04-30 . Retrieved 2011-01-18 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  CS1 maint archived copy as title  link   a b Engineering Council European Directive on Recognition of Professional Qualifications.  Engineering Council Chartered Engineer CEng  National Organization for Examination and Training NOET of Iran . sanjesh.org . Retrieved 2016-07-01 .  Who is Professional Engineer . Professional Engineering Exam . NOET. Archived from the original on 2016-06-30. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   What-is-Eureta . Archived from the original on 2013-04-14. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Directive 2005-36-EC . 29 September 2013. Archived from the original on 29 September 2013. Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   corenng.org . Archived from the original on 2004-09-19. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Archived copy . Archived from the original on 2011-02-19 . Retrieved 2010-11-25 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  CS1 maint archived copy as title  link   About RPEng   Registered Professional Engineers . Registered Professional Engineers . Retrieved 2016-06-01 .  National Engineering Register .  Continuing Professional Development . BPEQ.  BPEQ . www.bpeq.qld.gov.au .  a b Australian Government Award, Professional Employees Award 2010 , Office of the Fair Work Ombudsman , July 29, 2017. Retrieved 20180605.  Eureta . Archived from the original on 2013-09-28. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Bundesverband hherer Berufe der Technik, Wirtschaft und Gestaltung e.V.  Regulated Professions in the UK Archived 2008-03-27 at the Wayback Machine . UK Department for children, schools and families. Retrieved 2 November 2007.  Titler i udlandet - IDA.dk . ida.dk .  Law Document English View . Ontario.ca . 24 July 2014.  Code of ethics of engineers .  Andronache, Tatiana, The Importance of Being Engineer Archived 2004-09-18 at the Wayback Machine .  Engineers Canada PDF . Archived from the original PDF on 2005-10-24. Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   APEGGA website  ASET Technology Alberta, p. 2 Archived 2011-07-06 at the Wayback Machine  CIPS National   Canadas Association of Information Technology Professionals .  CIPS Ontario   Home .  a b httpsengineers.texas.govdownloadslawrules.pdf  httpsfbpe.orgwp-contentuploads201510Chapter-471-04.13.15.pdf  httpsos.ga.govplbacrobatLaws09_Professional_Engineers_and_Land_Surveyors.pdf  What is a PE . www.nspe.org .  What Do You Mean I Cant Call Myself a Software Engineer PDF .  Status of Engineers . Engineering Council . Retrieved 16 April 2019 .  Registered Had Engineer United Kingdom . European Council . Retrieved 16 April 2019 .  Chief engineer class 1 fishing vessel United Kingdom . European Council . Retrieved 16 April 2019 .  Chief Engineer Class 2 - Fishing Vessels United Kingdom . European Council . Retrieved 16 April 2019 .  The professional titles . Engineering Council . Retrieved 16 April 2019 .  International Register of Professional Engineers . Engineering Council . Retrieved 16 April 2019 .  Professions Regulated by Professional Bodies Incorporated by Royal Charter . NARIC.org.uk . Retrieved 16 April 2019 .  Schule und Recht in Niedersachsen Schulrecht . www.schure.de .  Gesetz zum Schutze der Berufsbezeichnung Ingenieur und Ingenieurin   Ingenieurgesetz   IngG   BayRS 702-2-W, zuletzt gendert durch  1 des Gesetzes vom 24. Mrz 2010 GVBl S. 138 Archived 2010-11-21 at the Wayback Machine  Brandenburg.de , Brandenburgisches Ingenieurgesetz BbgIngG Vom 29. Juni 2004 GVBl.I04, Nr. 15, S.326, zuletzt gendert durch Artikel 2 des Gesetzes vom 11. Mrz 2010 GVBl.I10, Nr. 15  Centro Argentino de Ingenieros .  what is cost engineering . Archived from the original on 2007-11-19 . Retrieved 2007-11-21 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  External links Professional Engineers in Europe Occupational Outlook Handbook, 201011 Edition   Engineers, Bureau of Labor Statistics of the U.S. Department of Labor Going Global The case for enhancing global trade in professional services   Institution of Engineers, Australia 2003 Authority control NDL  00562513 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleRegulation_and_licensure_in_engineering oldid906932312  Categories  Professional certification in engineering Hidden categories CS1 errors deprecated parameters CS1 errors missing periodical Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint archived copy as title All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Articles lacking in-text citations from August 2018 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles containing French-language text Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers