Deductive reasoning From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Method of reasoning by which premises understood to be true produce logically certain conclusions Deductive reasoning , also deductive logic , is the process of reasoning from one or more statements premises to reach a logically certain conclusion. 1  Deductive reasoning goes in the same direction as that of the conditionals, and links premises with conclusions . If all premises are true, the terms are clear , and the rules of deductive logic are followed, then the conclusion reached is necessarily true . Deductive reasoning  top-down logic  contrasts with inductive reasoning  bottom-up logic  in the following way in deductive reasoning, a conclusion is reached reductively by applying general rules which hold over the entirety of a closed domain of discourse , narrowing the range under consideration until only the conclusions is left. In inductive reasoning, the conclusion is reached by generalizing or extrapolating from specific cases to general rules, i.e., there is epistemic uncertainty . However, the inductive reasoning mentioned here is not the same as induction used in mathematical proofs  mathematical induction is actually a form of deductive reasoning. Deductive reasoning differs from abductive reasoning by the direction of the reasoning relative to the conditionals. Deductive reasoning goes in the same direction as that of the conditionals, whereas abductive reasoning goes in the opposite direction to that of the conditionals. Contents 1 Simple example 2 Reasoning with modus ponens, modus tollens, and the law of syllogism 2.1 Modus ponens 2.2 Modus tollens 2.3 Law of syllogism 3 Validity and soundness 4 History 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Simple example  edit  An example of an argument using deductive reasoning All men are mortal. First premise Socrates is a man. Second premise Therefore, Socrates is mortal. Conclusion The first premise states that all objects classified as men have the attribute mortal. The second premise states that Socrates is classified as a man   a member of the set men. The conclusion then states that Socrates must be mortal because he inherits this attribute from his classification as a man. Reasoning with modus ponens, modus tollens, and the law of syllogism  edit  Modus ponens  edit  Main article Modus ponens Modus ponens also known as affirming the antecedent or the law of detachment is the primary deductive rule of inference . It applies to arguments that have as first premise a conditional statement  P  Q displaystyle Prightarrow Q  and as second premise the antecedent  P displaystyle P  of the conditional statement. It obtains the consequent  Q displaystyle Q  of the conditional statement as its conclusion. The argument form is listed below P  Q displaystyle Prightarrow Q   First premise is a conditional statement P displaystyle P   Second premise is the antecedent Q displaystyle Q   Conclusion deduced is the consequent In this form of deductive reasoning, the consequent  Q displaystyle Q  obtains as the conclusion from the premises of a conditional statement  P  Q displaystyle Prightarrow Q  and its antecedent  P displaystyle P . However, the antecedent  P displaystyle P  cannot be similarly obtained as the conclusion from the premises of the conditional statement  P  Q displaystyle Prightarrow Q  and the consequent  Q displaystyle Q . Such an argument commits the logical fallacy of affirming the consequent . The following is an example of an argument using modus ponens If an angle satisfies 90  A displaystyle A  180, then A displaystyle A is an obtuse angle. A displaystyle A  120. A displaystyle A is an obtuse angle. Since the measurement of angle A displaystyle A is greater than 90 and less than 180, we can deduce from the conditional if-then statement that A displaystyle A is an obtuse angle. However, if we are given that A displaystyle A is an obtuse angle, we cannot deduce from the conditional statement that 90  A displaystyle A  180. It might be true that other angles outside this range are also obtuse. Modus tollens  edit  Main article Modus tollens Modus tollens also known as the law of contrapositive is a deductive rule of inference. It validates an argument that has as premises a conditional statement  P  Q displaystyle Prightarrow Q  and the negation of the consequent   Q displaystyle lnot Q  and as conclusion the negation of the antecedent   P displaystyle lnot P . In contrast to modus ponens , reasoning with modus tollens goes in the opposite direction to that of the conditional. The general expression for modus tollens is the following P  Q displaystyle Prightarrow Q . First premise is a conditional statement  Q displaystyle lnot Q . Second premise is the negation of the consequent  P displaystyle lnot P . Conclusion deduced is the negation of the antecedent The following is an example of an argument using modus tollens If it is raining, then there are clouds in the sky. There are no clouds in the sky. Thus, it is not raining. Law of syllogism  edit  In proposition logic the law of syllogism takes two conditional statements and forms a conclusion by combining the hypothesis of one statement with the conclusion of another. Here is the general form P  Q displaystyle Prightarrow Q Q  R displaystyle Qrightarrow R Therefore, P  R displaystyle Prightarrow R . The following is an example If the animal is a Yorkie, then its a dog. If the animal is a dog, then its a mammal. Therefore, if the animal is a Yorkie, then its a mammal. We deduced the final statement by combining the hypothesis of the first statement with the conclusion of the second statement. We also allow that this could be a false statement. This is an example of the transitive property in mathematics. Another example is the transitive property of equality which can be stated in this form A  B displaystyle AB . B  C displaystyle BC . Therefore, A  C displaystyle AC . Validity and soundness  edit  Argument terminology Deductive arguments are evaluated in terms of their validity and soundness . An argument is  valid  if it is impossible for its premises to be true while its conclusion is false. In other words, the conclusion must be true if the premises are true. An argument can be valid even if one or more of its premises are false. An argument is  sound  if it is valid and the premises are true. It is possible to have a deductive argument that is logically valid but is not sound . Fallacious arguments often take that form. The following is an example of an argument that is valid, but not sound Everyone who eats carrots is a quarterback. John eats carrots. Therefore, John is a quarterback. The examples first premise is false  there are people who eat carrots who are not quarterbacks  but the conclusion would necessarily be true, if the premises were true. In other words, it is impossible for the premises to be true and the conclusion false. Therefore, the argument is valid, but not sound. False generalizations  such as Everyone who eats carrots is a quar terback  are often used to make unsound arguments. The fact that there are some people who eat carrots but are not quarterbacks proves the flaw of the argument. In this example, the first statement uses categorical reasoning , saying that all carrot-eaters are definitely quarterbacks. This theory of deductive reasoning  also known as term logic  was developed by Aristotle , but was superseded by propositional sentential logic and predicate logic .  citation needed  Deductive reasoning can be contrasted with inductive reasoning , in regards to validity and soundness. In cases of inductive reasoning, even though the premises are true and the argument is valid, it is possible for the conclusion to be false determined to be false with a counterexample or other means. History  edit  This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .  January 2015  Aristotle , a Greek philosopher , started documenting deductive reasoning in the 4th century BC. 2  See also  edit  Web portal Abductive reasoning Analogical reasoning Argument logic Argumentation theory Correspondence theory of truth Decision making Decision theory Defeasible reasoning Fallacy Fault Tree Analysis Geometry Hypothetico-deductive method Inference Inquiry Legal syllogism Logic and rationality Logical consequence Logical reasoning Mathematical logic Natural deduction Peirces theory of deductive reasoning Propositional calculus Retroductive reasoning Scientific method Subjective logic Theory of justification References  edit   Sternberg, R. J. 2009. Cognitive Psychology . Belmont, CA Wadsworth. p.  578. ISBN   978-0-495-50629-4 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Evans, Jonathan St. B. T. Newstead, Stephen E. Byrne, Ruth M. J. , eds. 1993. Human Reasoning The Psychology of Deduction Reprint ed.. Psychology Press. p.  4. ISBN   9780863773136 . Retrieved 2015-01-26 . In one sense ... one can see the psychology of deductive reasoning as being as old as the study of logic, which originated in the writings of Aristotle. Further reading  edit  Vincent F. Hendricks , Thought 2 Talk A Crash Course in Reflection and Expression , New York Automatic Press  VIP, 2005, ISBN   87-991013-7-8 Philip Johnson-Laird , Ruth M. J. Byrne , Deduction , Psychology Press 1991, ISBN   978-0-86377-149-1 Zarefsky, David, Argumentation The Study of Effective Reasoning Parts I and II , The Teaching Company 2002 Bullemore, Thomas,  The Pragmatic Problem of Induction . External links  edit  Look up deductive reasoning in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Wikiquote has quotations related to Deductive reasoning Look up deductive reasoning in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Wikiversity has learning resources about Deductive Logic Deductive reasoning at PhilPapers Deductive reasoning at the Indiana Philosophy Ontology Project Deductive reasoning . Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Links to related articles v t e Learning Simple non-associative learning Habituation Sensitization Associative learning Operant conditioning Classical conditioning Imprinting Observational learning Insight learning Deductive reasoning Inductive reasoning Abductive reasoning v t e Logic Outline History Fields Computer science Inference Philosophy of logic Proof Semantics Syntax Logics Classical Informal Critical thinking Reason Mathematical Non-classical Philosophical Theories Argumentation Metalogic Metamathematics Set Foundations Abduction Analytic and synthetic propositions Contradiction Paradox Antinomy Deduction Deductive closure Definition Description Entailment Linguistic Form Induction Logical truth Name Necessity and sufficiency Probability Reference Statement Substitution Truth Validity Lists topics Mathematical logic Boolean algebra Set theory other Logicians Rules of inference Paradoxes Fallacies Logic symbols Portal Category WikiProject   talk  changes v t e Philosophical logic Critical thinking and informal logic Analysis Ambiguity Argument Belief Bias Credibility Evidence Explanation Explanatory power Fact Fallacy Inquiry Opinion Parsimony Occams razor Premise Propaganda Prudence Reasoning Relevance Rhetoric Rigor Vagueness Theories of deduction Constructivism Dialetheism Fictionalism Finitism Formalism Intuitionism Logical atomism Logicism Nominalism Platonic realism Pragmatism Realism Authority control GND  4011271-8 NDL  00561931 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleDeductive_reasoning oldid914542728  Categories  Deductive reasoning Logic Problem solving skills Reasoning Hidden categories Articles with short description All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2018 Articles to be expanded from January 2015 All articles to be expanded Articles using small message boxes Portal templates with redlinked portals Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers