Computational mathematics From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search A black and white rendition of the Yale Babylonian Collections Tablet YBC 7289 c. 18001600 BCE, showing a Babylonian approximation to the square root of 2 1 24 51 10 w sexagesimal in the context of Pythagoras Theorem for an isosceles triangle. The tablet also gives an example where one side of the square is 30, and the resulting diagonal is 42 25 35 or 42.4263888. Computational mathematics may refer to two different aspects of the relation between computing and mathematics. Computational applied mathematics consists roughly of using mathematics for allowing and improving computer computation in applied mathematics . Computational mathematics may also refer to the use of computers for mathematics itself. This includes the use of computers for mathematical computations  computer algebra , the study of what can and cannot be computerized in mathematics  effective methods , which computations may be done with present technology  complexity theory , and which proofs can be done on computers  proof assistants . Both aspects of computational mathematics involves mathematical research in mathematics as well as in areas of science where computing plays a central and essential rolethat, is almost all sciences, and emphasize algorithms, numerical methods, and symbolic computations . 1  Contents 1 Areas of computational mathematics 2 References 3 Further reading 4 External links Areas of computational mathematics  edit  Computational mathematics emerged as a distinct part of applied mathematics by the early 1950s. Currently, computational mathematics can refer to or include computational science , also known as scientific computation or computational engineering solving mathematical problems by computer simulation as opposed to analytic methods of applied mathematics numerical methods used in scientific computation, for example numerical linear algebra and numerical solution of partial differential equations stochastic methods, 2  such as Monte Carlo methods and other representations of uncertainty in scientific computation the mathematics of scientific computation, 3  4  , in particular numerical analysis , the theory of numerical methods computational complexity computer algebra and computer algebra systems computer-assisted research in various areas of mathematics, such as logic  automated theorem proving , discrete mathematics , combinatorics , number theory , and computational algebraic topology cryptography and computer security , which involve, in particular, research on primality testing , factorization , elliptic curves , and mathematics of blockchain computational linguistics , the use of mathematical and computer techniques in natural languages computational algebraic geometry computational group theory computational geometry computational number theory computational topology computational statistics algorithmic information theory algorithmic game theory mathematical economics , the use of mathematics in economics, finance and, to certain extents, of accounting. References  edit   National Science Foundation , Division of Mathematical Science, Program description PD 06-888 Computational Mathematics , 2006. Retrieved April 2007.  NSF Seeks Proposals on Stochastic Systems . SIAM News. August 19, 2005 . Retrieved February 2, 2015 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Future Directions in Computational Mathematics, Algorithms, and Scientific Software, Report of panel chaired by R. Rheinbold, 1985. Distributed by SIAM .  Mathematics of Computation , Journal overview . Retrieved April 2007. Further reading  edit  Cucker, F. 2003. Foundations of Computational Mathematics Special Volume . Handbook of Numerical Analysis. North-Holland Publishing. ISBN   978-0-444-51247-5 . Harris, J. W. Stocker, H. 1998. Handbook of Mathematics and Computational Science . Springer-Verlag. ISBN   978-0-387-94746-4 . Hartmann, A.K. 2009. Practical Guide to Computer Simulations . World Scientific. ISBN   978-981-283-415-7 . Archived from the original on February 11, 2009 . Retrieved May 3, 2012 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help  Nonweiler, T. R. 1986. Computational Mathematics An Introduction to Numerical Approximation . John Wiley and Sons. ISBN   978-0-470-20260-9 . Gentle, J. E. 2007. Foundations of Computational Science . Springer-Verlag. ISBN   978-0-387-00450-1 . White, R. E. 2003. Computational Mathematics Models, Methods, and Analysis with MATLAB . Chapman and Hall. ISBN   978-1584883647 . Yang, X. S. 2008. Introduction to Computational Mathematics . World Scientific. ISBN   978-9812818171 . Strang, G. 2007. Computational Science and Engineering . Wiley. ISBN   978-0961408817 . External links  edit  Foundations of Computational Mathematics , a non-profit organization International Journal of Computer Discovered Mathematics v t e Areas of mathematics Foundations Category theory Information theory Mathematical logic Philosophy of mathematics Set theory Algebra Abstract Elementary Linear Multilinear Analysis Calculus Real analysis Complex analysis Differential equations Functional analysis Discrete Combinatorics Graph theory Order theory Game theory Geometry Algebraic Analytic Differential Discrete Euclidean Finite Number theory Arithmetic Algebraic number theory Analytic number theory Diophantine geometry Topology Algebraic Differential Geometric Applied Control theory Mathematical biology Mathematical chemistry Mathematical economics Mathematical finance Mathematical physics Mathematical psychology Mathematical statistics Probability Statistics Computational Computer science Theory of computation Numerical analysis Optimization Computer algebra Others History of mathematics Recreational mathematics Mathematics and art Mathematics education Category Portal Commons WikiProject v t e Industrial and applied mathematics Computational Computational logic Algorithms design analysis Information theory Coding theory Cryptography Discrete Computer algebra Computational number theory Combinatorics Graph theory Discrete geometry Mathematical physics Algebraic Operator algebra Representation theory Renormalization group Feynman integral M-theory Analytic Differential geometry Fourier analysis Harmonic analysis Functional analysis Operator theory Analysis Approximation theory Numerical analysis Differential equations Dynamical systems Control theory Variational calculus Probability theory Distributions   random variables  Stochastic processes   analysis Path integral Stochastic variational calculus Decision sciences Statistics Operations research Optimization Game theory Mathematical economics Mathematical finance Other applications Biology Chemistry Psychology Sociology  The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics in the Natural Sciences  Category Mathematics portal   outline   topics list Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleComputational_mathematics oldid914590807  Categories  Computational mathematics Applied mathematics Computational science Hidden categories Use mdy dates from February 2015 CS1 errors deprecated parameters