High-density polyethylene From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Class of polyethylenes HDPE has SPI resin ID code 2 High-density polyethylene  HDPE  or polyethylene high-density  PEHD  is a thermoplastic polymer produced from the monomer ethylene . It is sometimes called alkathene or polythene when used for HDPE pipes . 1  With a high strength-to-density ratio, HDPE is used in the production of plastic bottles , corrosion-resistant piping, geomembranes and plastic lumber . HDPE is commonly recycled, and has the number 2 as its resin identification code . In 2007, the global HDPE market reached a volume of more than 30 million tons. 2  Contents 1 Properties 2 Applications 3 See also 4 References 5 External Links Properties  edit  HDPE is known for its high strength-to-density ratio. 3  The density of HDPE can range from 930 to 970 kgm 3 . 4  Although the density of HDPE is only marginally higher than that of low-density polyethylene , HDPE has little branching , giving it stronger intermolecular forces and tensile strength than LDPE. The difference in strength exceeds the difference in density, giving HDPE a higher specific strength . 5  It is also harder and more opaque and can withstand somewhat higher temperatures 120  C248  F for short periods. High-density polyethylene, unlike polypropylene , cannot withstand normally required autoclaving conditions. The lack of branching is ensured by an appropriate choice of catalyst e.g., ZieglerNatta catalysts  and reaction conditions. The physical properties of HDPE can vary depending on the molding process that is used to manufacture a specific sample to some degree a determining factor are the international standardized testing methods employed to identify these properties for a specific process. For example, in Rotational Molding, to identify the environmental stress crack resistance of a sample, the Not ched Constant Tensile Load Test NCTL is put to use. 6  Owing to these desirable properties, pipes constructed out of HDPE are ideally applicable for potable water, 7  and waste water storm and sewage. 8  Roller on HDPE Construction Entrance Mat Applications  edit  Corrugated HDPE pipe installation in storm drain project in Mexico HDPE is resistant to many different solvents and has a wide variety of applications 3D printer filament Arena board puck board 9  Backpacking frames Ballistic plates Banners Bottle caps Boats Chemical-resistant piping Coax cable inner insulator Conduit protector for electrical or communications cables Corrosion protection for steel pipelines Electrical and plumbing boxes Far-IR lenses Fireworks Folding chairs and tables Food storage containers Fuel tanks for vehicles Geomembrane for hydraulic applications such as canals and bank reinforcements and chemical containment Geothermal heat transfer piping systems Heat-resistant firework mortars Housewrap  Tyvek  Hovercraft  The material is too heavy and dense for such craft but is still used occasionally Laundry Detergent Jugs Lasts for shoes Microwave telescope windows Milk Jugs Natural gas distribution pipe systems 10  Piping for fluid, slurry and gas purposes Plastic bags Plastic bottles suitable both for recycling such as milk jugs or re-use Plastic lumber Plastic surgery skeletal and facial reconstruction 11  Potable water mains 7  Root barrier Shampoo Bottles Sewage mains 8  Snowboard rails and boxes Stone paper Storage sheds Swimming pool installation Trackout Control Mats Telecom ducts 12  Water pipes for domestic water supply and agricultural processes 7  Wood plastic composites utilizing recycled polymers  HDPE Sheet which has been extrusion welded HDPE is also used for cell liners in subtitle D sanitary landfills , wherein large sheets of HDPE are either extrusion welded or wedge welded to form a homogeneous chemical-resistant barrier, with the intention of preventing the pollution of soil and groundwater by the liquid constituents of solid waste . HDPE is preferred by the pyrotechnics trade for mortars over steel or PVC tubes, being more durable and safer HDPE tends to rip or tear in a malfunction instead of shattering and becoming shrapnel like the other materials. Milk bottles, jugs, and other hollow goods manufactured through blow molding are the most important application area for HDPE, accounting for one-third of worldwide production, or more than 8 million tonnes. Above all, China, where beverage bottles made from HDPE were first imported in 2005, is a growing market for rigid HDPE packaging, as a result of its improving standard of living. In India and other highly populated, emerging nations, infrastructure expansion includes the deployment of pipes and cable insulation made from HDPE. 2  The material has benefited from discussions about possible health and environmental problems caused by PVC and polycarbonate associated Bisphenol A , as well as its advantages over glass, metal, and cardboard. See also  edit  Polyethylene PE Cross-linked polyethylene PEX Linear low-density polyethylene LLDPE Low-density polyethylene LDPE HDPE pipe HDPE Medium-density polyethylene MDPE Phillips Disaster Plastic recycling Resin identification code Ultra-high-molecular-weight polyethylene UHMWPE Stretch wrap References  edit   Pipe materials . level.org.nz  a b Market Study Polyethylene HDPE . Ceresana Research. .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Thermoforming HDPE . Dermnet.org.nz  Typical Properties of Polyethylene PE . Ides.com. Retrieved on 2011-12-30.  Compare Materials HDPE and LDPE . Makeitfrom.com. Retrieved on 2011-12-30.  www.rotomolding.org . Retrieved 2016-4-20.  a b c Acu-Water  AU Drinking Water Pipelines  Acu-Tech Piping Systems  a b Acu-Sewer  Acu-Tech Piping Systems  Puck Board HDPE Sheets . Professional Plastics . Retrieved 24 December 2018 .  Acu-Gas  Acu-Tech Piping Systems  Dermnet.org.nz . Dermnet.org.nz 2011-07-01. Retrieved on 2011-12-30.  Acu-Comms  Acu-Tech Piping Systems High-density polyethylene at the Encyclopdia Britannica v t e Plastics Chemical types Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene ABS Cross-linked polyethylene PEX, XLPE Ethylene vinyl acetate EVA Polymethyl methacrylate PMMA Polyethyl methacrylate PEMA Polyacrylic acid PAA Polyamide PA Polybutylene PB Polybutylene terephthalate PBT Polycarbonate PC Polyetheretherketone PEEK Polyester PEs Polyethylene PE Polyethylene terephthalate PET, PETE Polyimide PI Polylactic acid PLA Polyoxymethylene POM Polyphenyl ether PPE Polypropylene PP Polystyrene PS Polysulfone PES Polytetrafluoroethylene PTFE Polyurethane PU Polyvinyl chloride PVC Polyvinylidene chloride PVDC Styrene maleic anhydride SMA Styrene-acrylonitrile SAN Mechanical types Thermoplastic Thermosetting polymer Duroplast Corrugated plastic Polymeric foam High performance plastics Additives Polymer additive Colorants Plasticizer Stabilizer for polymers Biodegradable additives Filler materials Plastics processing injection moulding plastics extrusion stretch-blow molding thermoforming compression molding calendering transfer molding laminating fiberglass molding pultrusion filament winding vacuum forming rotational molding Products Plastics industry Commodity plastics Engineering plastics High-performance plastics Plastic film Plastic bottle Plastic bag Plastic shopping bag Plastic cutlery Blister pack Foam food container Construction Geosynthetics CategoryPlastics applications Environment and health v t e Health issues of plastics and polyhalogenated compounds PHCs Plasticizers  Phthalates DIBP DBP BBP BBzP DIHP DEHP DOP DIDP DINP Miscellaneous plasticizers Organophosphates Adipates  DEHA DOA  Monomers Bisphenol A BPA, in Polycarbonates  Vinyl chloride in PVC  Miscellaneous additives incl. PHCs PBDEs PCBs Organotins PFCs Perfluorooctanoic acid Health issues Teratogen Carcinogen Endocrine disruptor Diabetes Obesity Obesogen Polymer fume fever Pollution Plastic pollution Great Pacific garbage patch Persistent organic pollutant Dioxins List of environmental health hazards Regulations California Proposition 65 European REACH regulation Japan Toxic Substances Law Toxic Substances Control Act Waste Plastic pollution Great Pacific garbage patch Persistent organic pollutant Dioxins List of environmental health hazards Plastic recycling Biodegradable plastic Identification codes External Links  edit  Polyethylene UHMWPE HDPE LDPE LLDPE  What are the differences Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleHigh-density_polyethylene oldid912778479  Categories  Plastics Polyolefins Hidden categories Articles with short description Articles with Encyclopdia Britannica links