Transportation engineering From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search The lead section of this article may need to be rewritten. Please discuss this issue on the articles talk page . Use the lead layout guide to ensure the section follows Wikipedias norms and to be inclusive of all essential details.  November 2018   Learn how and when to remove this template message  The engineering of this roundabout in Bristol , England, attempts to make traffic flow free-moving Transportation engineering or transport engineering is the application of technology and scientific principles to the planning, functional design, operation and management of facilities for any mode of transportation in order to provide for the safe, efficient, rapid, comfortable, convenient, economical, and environmentally compatible movement of people and goods transport. The planning aspects of transportation engineering relate to elements of urban planning , and involve technical forecasting decisions and political factors. Technical forecasting of passenger travel usually involves an urban transportation planning model, requiring the estimation of trip generation number of purposeful trips, trip distribution destination choice, where the traveler is going, mode choice  mode that is being taken, and route assignment the streets or routes that are being used. More sophisticated forecasting can include other aspects of traveler decisions, including auto ownership, trip chaining the decision to link individual trips together in a tour and the choice of residential or business location known as land use forecasting . Passenger trips are the focus of transportation engineering because they often represent the peak of demand on any transportation system. A review of descriptions of the scope of various committees indicates that while facility planning and design continue to be the core of the transportation engineering field, such areas as operations planning, logistics, network analysis, financing, and policy analysis are also important, particularly to those working in highway and urban transportation. The National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying NCEES list online the safety protocols, geometric design requirements, and signal timing. Transportation engineering, primarily involves planning, design, construction, maintenance, and operation of transportation facilities. The facilities support air, highway, railroad, pipeline, water, and even space transportation. The design aspects of transportation engineering include the sizing of transportation facilities how many lanes or how much capacity the facility ha s, determining the materials and thickness used in pavement designing the geometry vertical and horizontal alignment of the roadway or track. Before any planning occurs an engineer must take what is known as an inventory of the area or, if it is appropriate, the previous system in place. This inventory or database must include information on population, land use, economic activity, transportation facilities and services, travel patterns and volumes, laws and ordinances, regional financial resources, and community val ues and expectations. These inventories help the engineer create business models to complete accurate forecasts of the future conditions of the system. Operations and management involve traffic engineering , so that vehicles move smoothly on the road or track. Older techniques include signs , signals , markings , and tolling . Newer technologies involve intelligent transportation systems , including advanced traveler information systems such as variable message signs , advanced traffic control systems such as ramp meters , and vehicle infrastructure integration . Human factors are an aspect of transportation engineering, particularly concerning driver-vehicle interface and user interface of road signs, signals, and markings. Contents 1 Highway engineering 2 Railroad engineering 3 Port and harbor engineering 4 Airport engineering 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Highway engineering  edit  Main article Highway engineering Engineers in this specialization Handle the planning, design, construction, and operation of highways, roads, and other vehicular facilities as well as their related bicycle and pedestrian realms Estimate the transportation needs of the public and then secure the funding for projects Analyze locations of high traffic volumes and high collisions for safety and capacity Use engineering principles to improve the transportation system Utilize the three design controls, which are the drivers, the vehicles, and the roadways themselves Railroad engineering  edit  Main article Railway systems engineering Railway engineers handle the design, construction, and operation of railroads and mass transit systems that use a fixed guideway such as light rail or monorails . Typical tasks include determining horizontal and vertical alignment design, station location and design, and construction cost estimating. Railroad engineers can also move into the specialized field of train dispatching which focuses on train movement control. Railway engineers also work to build a cleaner and safer transportation network by reinvesting and revitalizing the rail system to meet future demands. In the United States, railway engineers work with elected officials in Washington, D.C. on rail transportation issues to make sure that the rail system meets the countrys transportation needs. 1  Port and harbor engineering  edit  Not to be confused with Naval architecture or marine engineering . This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .  November 2018  Port and harbor engineers handle the design, construction, and operation of ports, harbors, canals, and other maritime facilities. Airport engineering  edit  This section does not cite any sources . Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .  January 2011   Learn how and when to remove this template message  Airport engineers design and construct airports. Airport engineers must account for the impacts and demands of aircraft in their design of airport facilities. These engineers must use the analysis of predominant wind direction to determine runway orientation, determine the size of runway border and safety areas, different wing tip to wing tip clearances for all gates and must designate the clear zones in the entire port. See also  edit  Bicycle transportation engineering Heuristic routing Individual mobility Interplanetary Transport Network Pavement engineering Principles of intelligent urbanism Space syntax pedestrian and vehicular analysis using similar techniques to standard transportation engineering Transportation forecasting Transportation planning Utility cycling References  edit   Association of American Railroads . AAR . Retrieved 30 June 2011 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em External links  edit  Wikibooks has a book on the topic of Fundamentals of Transportation Media related to Transport engineering at Wikimedia Commons httpwww.ite.org Institute of Transportation Engineers , a professional society for transportation engineers httpwww.itsa.org ITS America httpwww.asce.org ASCE Authority control LCCN  sh85137069 NDL  00566829 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleTransportation_engineering oldid902227153  Categories  Transportation engineering Engineering disciplines Civil engineering Hidden categories Wikipedia introduction cleanup from November 2018 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from November 2018 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Use dmy dates from February 2013 Articles to be expanded from November 2018 All articles to be expanded Articles using small message boxes Articles needing additional references from January 2011 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers