Middleware From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Anything between the kernel and user applications is considered middleware. Middleware is computer software that provides services to software applications beyond those available from the operating system . It can be described as software glue. 1  Middleware makes it easier for software developers to implement communication and inputoutput , so they can focus on the specific purpose of their application. It gained popularity in the 1980s as a solution to the problem of how to link newer applications to older legacy systems, although the term had been in use since 1968. 2  Contents 1 In distributed applications 2 Other examples 3 See also 4 References 5 External links In distributed applications  edit  Main article Middleware distributed applications Software architecture Middleware The term is most commonly used for software that enables communication and management of data in distributed applications . An IETF workshop in 2000 defined middleware as those services found above the transport i.e. over TCPIP layer set of services but below the application environment i.e. below application-level APIs . 3  In this more specific sense middleware can be described as the dash - in client-server , or the -to- in peer-to-peer . Middleware includes web servers , application servers , content management systems , and similar tools that support application development and delivery. 4  ObjectWeb defines middleware as The software layer that lies between the operating system and applications on each side of a distributed computing system in a network. 5  Services that can be regarded as middleware include enterprise application integration , data integration , message oriented middleware MOM, object request brokers ORBs, and the enterprise service bus ESB. 6  Database access services are often characterised as middleware. Some of them are language specific implementations and support heterogeneous features and other related communication features. 7  Examples of database-oriented middleware include ODBC , JDBC and transaction processing monitors. 8  Distributed computing system middleware can loosely be divided into two categoriesthose that provide human-time services such as web request servicing and those that perform in machine-time. This latter middleware is somewhat standardized through the Service Availability Forum 9  and is commonly used in complex, embedded systems within telecom, defense and aerospace industries. 10  Other examples  edit  The term middleware is used in other contexts as well. Middleware is sometimes used in a similar sense to a software driver , an abstraction layer that hides detail about hardware devices or other software from an application. The Android operating system uses the Linux kernel at its core, and also provides an application framework that developers incorporate into their applications. In addition, Android provides a middleware layer including libraries that provide services such as data storage, screen display, multimedia , and web browsing. Because the middleware libraries are compiled to machine language , services execute quickly. Middleware libraries also implement device-specific functions, so applications and the application framework need not concern themselves with variations between various Android devices. Androids middleware layer also contains the ART virtual machine and its core Java application libraries. 11  Game engine software such as Gamebryo and RenderWare are sometimes described as middleware, because they provide many services to simplify game development. 12  In simulation technology, middleware is generally used in the context of the high level architecture HLA that applies to many distributed simulations. It is a layer of software that lies between the application code and the run-time infrastructure . Middleware generally consists of a library of functions, and enables a number of applicationssimulations or federates in HLA terminologyto page these functions from the common library rather than re-create them for each application. 13  Wireless networking developers can use middleware to meet the challenges associated with a wireless sensor network WSN. Implementing a middleware application allows WSN developers to integrate operating systems and hardware with the wide variety of various applications that are currently available. 14  The QNX operating system offers middleware for providing multimedia services for use in automobiles , aircraft and other environments. 15  Radio-frequency identification RFID software toolkits provide middleware to filter noisy and redundant raw data. 16  See also  edit  Language-agnostic Third-party software component References  edit   What is Middleware . Middleware.org . Defining Technology. 2008. Archived from the original on June 29, 2012 . Retrieved 2013-08-11 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  CS1 maint unfit url  link  .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Gall, Nick July 30, 2005. Origin of the term middleware  .  Home . IETF .  Etzkorn, L. H. 2017. Introduction to Middleware Web Services, Object Components, and Cloud Computing . CRC Press. pp.  45. ISBN   9781498754101 .  Krakowiak, Sacha. Whats middleware . ObjectWeb.org. Archived from the original on 2005-05-07 . Retrieved 2005-05-06 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Luckham, D. C. 2011. Event Processing for Business Organizing the Real-Time Enterprise . John Wiley  Sons. pp.  2728. ISBN   9781118171851 .  Simon, A. R. Wheeler, T. 2014. Open ClientServer Computing and Middleware . Academic Press. pp.  4349. ISBN   9781483214276 .  Arregoces, M. Portolani, M. 2003. Data Center Fundamentals . Cisco Press. pp.  9293. ISBN   9781587140747 .  Service Availability Interface Specification PDF . Service Availability Forum. 30 September 2011 . Retrieved 26 July 2018 .  Jokiaho, T. Fryer, J. 2012. Foreword. Service Availability Principles and Practice . John Wiley  Sons. p.  xv. ISBN   9781119941675 .  Charlie Collins, Michael Galpin and Matthias Kaeppler, Android in Practice, Manning Publications, 2011  Moore, M. E. 2006. Introduction to the Game Industry . Pearson Prentice Hall. p.  169. ISBN   9780131687431 .  Becchini, R. Chilaev, P. Krivtsov, V. et al. 2003. Chapter 4 Middleware. In Drira, K. Martelli, A. Villemur, T. eds.. Cooperative Environments for Distributed Systems Engineering The Distributed Systems Environment Report . Springer. pp.  414. ISBN   9783540455820 .  Hadim, S. and Mohamed, N. 2006. Middleware challenges and approaches for wireless sensor networks. IEEE Distributed Systems Online vol 7. Issue 3. Retrieved March 4, 2009 from iEEE Distributed Systems Online  QNX Software Joins Internet ITS Consortium of Japan . QNX News Releases . QNX. 6 May 2008 . Retrieved 26 July 2018 .  Glover, B. Bhatt, H. 2006. RFID Essentials . OReilly Media. pp.  3844. ISBN   9780596009441 . External links  edit  The dictionary definition of middleware at Wiktionary v t e Computer science Note This template roughly follows the 2012 ACM Computing Classification System . Hardware Printed circuit board Peripheral Integrated circuit Very Large Scale Integration Systems on Chip SoCs Energy consumption Green computing Electronic design automation Hardware acceleration Computer systems organization Computer architecture Embedded system Real-time computing Dependability Networks Network architecture Network protocol Network components Network scheduler Network performance evaluation Network service Software organization Interpreter Middleware Virtual machine Operating system Software quality Software notations and tools Programming paradigm Programming language Compiler Domain-specific language Modeling language Software framework Integrated development environment Software configuration management Software library Software repository Software development Software development process Requirements analysis Software design Software construction Software deployment Software maintenance Programming team Open-source model Theory of computation Model of computation Formal language Automata theory Computational complexity theory Logic Semantics Algorithms Algorithm design Analysis of algorithms Algorithmic efficiency Randomized algorithm Computational geometry Mathematics of computing Discrete mathematics Probability Statistics Mathematical software Information theory Mathematical analysis Numerical analysis Information systems Database management system Information storage systems Enterprise information system Social information systems Geographic information system Decision support system Process control system Multimedia information system Data mining Digital library Computing platform Digital marketing World Wide Web Information retrieval Security Cryptography Formal methods Security services Intrusion detection system Hardware security Network security Information security Application security Humancomputer interaction Interaction design Social computing Ubiquitous computing Visualization Accessibility Concurrency Concurrent computing Parallel computing Distributed computing Multithreading Multiprocessing Artificial intelligence Natural language processing Knowledge representation and reasoning Computer vision Automated planning and scheduling Search methodology Control method Philosophy of artificial intelligence Distributed artificial intelligence Machine learning Supervised learning Unsupervised learning Reinforcement learning Multi-task learning Cross-validation Graphics Animation Rendering Image manipulation Graphics processing unit Mixed reality Virtual reality Image compression Solid modeling Applied computing E-commerce Enterprise software Computational mathematics Computational physics Computational chemistry Computational biology Computational social science Computational engineering Computational healthcare Digital art Electronic publishing Cyberwarfare Electronic voting Video games Word processing Operations research Educational technology Document management Book Category Portal Outline WikiProject Commons Authority control GND  4426067-2 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleMiddleware oldid913791038  Categories  Middleware Systems engineering Hidden categories CS1 errors deprecated parameters CS1 maint unfit url Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers