Low-density polyethylene From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search LDPE has SPI resin ID code 4 LDPE branching structure Low-density polyethylene  LDPE  is a thermoplastic made from the monomer ethylene . It was the first grade of polyethylene , produced in 1933 by Imperial Chemical Industries ICI using a high pressure process via free radical polymerization . 1  Its manufacture employs the same method today. The EPA estimates 5.7 of LDPE  recycling number 4  is recycled. 2  Despite competition from more modern polymers, LDPE continues to be an important plastic grade. In 2013 the worldwide LDPE market reached a volume of about US33 billion. 3  Contents 1 Properties 1.1 Chemical resistance 2 Applications 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Properties  edit  LDPE is defined by a density range of 0.9170.930 gcm 3 . 4  It is not reactive at room temperatures , except by strong oxidizing agents, and some solvents cause swelling. It can withstand temperatures of 80  C continuously and 90  C 194  F for a short time. Made in translucent or opaque variations, it is quite flexible and tough. LDPE has more branching on about 2 of the carbon atoms than HDPE , so its intermolecular forces  instantaneous-dipole induced-dipole attraction  are weaker, its tensile strength is lower, and its resilience is higher. Also, because its molecules are less tightly packed and less crystalline due to the side branches, its density is lower. When exposed to ambient solar radiation the plastic produces two greenhouse gases , methane and ethylene. Due to its low density properties branching it breaks down more easily over time, leading to higher surface areas. The production of these trace gases from virgin LDPE increase with surface areatime, with rates at the end of a 212-day incubation of 5.8 nmol g-1 d-1 of methane, 14.5 nmol g-1 d-1 of ethylene, 3.9 nmol g-1 d-1 of ethane and 9.7 nmol g-1 d-1 of propylene. When incubated in air, LDPE emits gases at rates 2 times and 76 times higher in comparison to water for methane and ethylene, respectively. 5  Chemical resistance  edit  Excellent resistance no attackno chemical reaction to dilute and concentrated acids , alcohols , bases and esters Good resistance minor attackvery low chemical reactivity to aldehydes , ketones and vegetable oils Limited resistance moderate attacksignificant chemical reaction, suitable for short-term use only to aliphatic and aromatic hydrocarbons , mineral oils , and oxidizing agents Poor resistance, and not recommended for use with halogenated hydrocarbons . 6  Applications  edit  A GEECO bowl, c.1950, still used in 2014. A piece of packaging foam made from LDPE A Ziploc bag made from LDPE Facial wash gel bottle made of LDPE LDPE is widely used for manufacturing various containers, dispensing bottles, wash bottles, tubing, plastic parts for computer components, and various molded laboratory equipment. Its most common use is in plastic bags . Other products made from it include Trays and general purpose containers Corrosion-resistant work surfaces Parts that need to be weldable and machinable Parts that require flexibility, for which it serves very well Very soft and pliable parts such as snap-on lids Six pack rings Juice and milk cartons are made of liquid packaging board , a laminate of paperboard and LDPE as the waterproof inner and outer layer, and often with of a layer of aluminum foil thus becoming aseptic packaging . 7  8  Packaging for computer hardware, such as hard disk drives , screen cards, and optical disc drives Playground slides Plastic wraps See also  edit  Linear low-density polyethylene LLDPE High-density polyethylene HDPE Medium-density polyethylene MDPE Ultra-high-molecular-weight polyethylene UHMWPE Polyethylene terephthalate PETPETE Stretch wrap References  edit   Dennis Malpass 2010. Introduction to Industrial Polyethylene Properties, Catalysts, and Processes . John Wiley and Sons. pp.  1. ISBN   978-0-470-62598-9 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Municipal Solid Waste Generation, Recycling, and Disposal in the United States PDF . EPA.gov.  Market Study Polyethylene LDPE 2nd edition . Ceresana.  BPF. Polyethylene Low Density LDPE, LLDPE . www.bpf.co.uk . Retrieved 2018-06-14 .  Karl, David M. Wilson, Samuel T. Ferrn, Sara Royer, Sarah-Jeanne 1 August 2018. Production of methane and ethylene from plastic in the environment . PLOS ONE . 13 8 e0200574. doi  10.1371journal.pone.0200574 . ISSN   1932-6203 . PMC   6070199 . Material was copied from this source, which is available under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License .  LDPE Chemical Compatibility Chart . CP Lab Safety.  LDPE products and applications . Exxon Mobil Corporation  DOW LDPE 5004I  permanent dead link  . IDES  The Plastics Web External links  edit  2010_MSW_Tables_and_Figures_508.pdf . epa.gov Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleLow-density_polyethylene oldid907975199  Categories  Polyolefins Plastics Packaging materials British inventions Hidden categories All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links