Polymerization From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search .mw-parser-output .quoteboxbackground-colorF9F9F9border1px solid aaabox-sizingborder-boxpadding10pxfont-size88max-width100.mw-parser-output .quotebox.floatleftmargin0.5em 1.4em 0.8em 0.mw-parser-output .quotebox.floatrightmargin0.5em 0 0.8em 1.4em.mw-parser-output .quotebox.centeredmargin0.5em auto 0.8em auto.mw-parser-output .quotebox.floatleft p,.mw- parser-output .quotebox.floatright pfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .quotebox-titlebackground-colorF9F9F9text-aligncenterfont-sizelargerfont-weightbold.mw-parser-output .quotebox-quote.quotedbeforefont-familyTimes New Roman,seriffont-weightboldfont-sizelargecolorgraycontent  vertical-align-45line-height0.mw-parser-output .quotebox-quote.quo tedafterfont-familyTimes New Roman,seriffont-weightboldfont-sizelargecolorgraycontent  line-height0.mw-parser-output .quotebox .left-alignedtext-alignleft.mw-parser-output .quotebox .right-alignedtext-alignright.mw-parser-output .quotebox .center-alignedtext-aligncenter.mw-parser-output .quotebox citedisplayblockfont-stylenormalmedia screen and max-width360px.mw-parser-output .quoteboxmin-width100margin0 0 0.8emimportantfloatnoneimportant IUPAC definition polymerization The process of converting a monomer or a mixture of monomers into a polymer . 1  An example of alkene polymerization , in which each styrene monomers double bond reforms as a single bond plus a bond to another styrene monomer. The product is polystyrene . In polymer chemistry , polymerization is a process of reacting monomer molecules together in a chemical reaction to form polymer chains or three-dimensional networks. 2  3  4  There are many forms of polymerization and different systems exist to categorize them. Contents 1 Introduction 2 Step-growth 3 Chain-growth 3.1 Physical polymer reaction engineering 3.2 Photopolymerization 4 See also 5 References Introduction  edit  Homopolymers A  A  A  A . . .  A A A A . . . displaystyle AAAA...rightarrow AAAA... Copolymers A  B  A  B . . .  A B A B . . . displaystyle ABAB...rightarrow ABAB... In chemical compounds , polymerization can occur via a variety of reaction mechanisms that vary in complexity due to the functional groups present in the reactants 4  and their inherent steric effects . In more straightforward polymerizations, alkenes form polymers through relatively simple radical reactions  in contrast, reactions involving substitution at a carbonyl group require more complex synthesis due to the way in which reactants polymerize. 4  Alkanes can also be polymerized, but only with the help of strong acids. 5  As alkenes can polymerize in somewhat straightforward radical reactions, they form useful compounds such as polyethylene and polyvinyl chloride PVC, 4  which are produced in high tonnages each year 4  due to their usefulness in manufacturing processes of commercial products, such as piping, insulation and packaging. In general, polymers such as PVC are referred to as  homopolymers , as they consist of repeated long chains or structures of the same monomer unit, whereas polymers that consist of more than one monomer unit are referred to as copolymers or co-polymers. 6  Other monomer units, such as formaldehyde hydrates or simple aldehydes, are able to polymerize themselves at quite low temperatures ca. 80  C to form trimers  4  molecules consisting of 3 monomer units, which can cyclize to form ring cyclic structures, or undergo further reactions to form tetramers , 4  or 4 monomer-unit compounds. Such small polymers are referred to as oligomers 4  . Generally, because formaldehyde is an exceptionally reactive electrophile it allows nucleophilic addition of hemiacetal intermediates, which are in general short-lived and relatively unstable mid-stage compounds that react with other molecules present to form more stable polymeric compounds. Polymerization that is not sufficiently moderated and proceeds at a fast rate can be very hazardous. This phenomenon is known as hazardous polymerization and can cause fires and explosions. Step-growth  edit  Main article Step-growth polymerization There are two main classes of polymerization reaction mechanisms step-growth and chain-growth. In step-growth or step polymerization, each step may involve the combination of two polymer molecules of any lengths to form a longer polymer molecule. The average molar mass increases slowly and long chains are formed only late in the reaction. 7  8  . Step-growth polymers are formed by independent reaction steps between functional groups of monomer units, usually containing heteroatoms such as nitrogen or oxygen. Most step-growth polymers are also classified as condensation polymers , since a small molecule such as water is lost when the polymer chain is lengthened. For example, polyester chains grow by reaction of alcohol and carboxylic acid groups to form ester links with loss of water. However, there are exceptions for example polyurethanes are step-growth polymers formed from isocyanate and alcohol bifunctional monomers without loss of water or other small molecule, and are classified as addition polymers rather than condensation polymers. Step-growth polymers increase in molecular weight at a very slow rate at lower conversions and reach moderately high molecular weights only at very high conversion i.e., 95. Chain-growth  edit  Main article Chain-growth polymerization In chain-growth or chain polymerization, the only chain-extension reaction step is the addition of a monomer to a growing chain with an active center such as a free radical or ion . Once the growth of a chain is initiated by formation of an active center, chain propagation is usually rapid by addition of a sequence of monomers. Long chains are formed from the beginning of the reaction. 7  8  Chain-growth polymerization or addition polymerization involves the linking together of molecules incorporating double or triple carbon-carbon bonds . These unsaturated monomers the identical molecules that make up the polymers have extra internal bonds that are able to break and link up with other monomers to form a repeating chain, whose backbone typically contains only carbon atoms. Chain-growth polymerization is involved in the manufacture of polymers such as polyethylene , polypropylene , and polyvinyl chloride PVC. A special case of chain-growth polymerization leads to living polymerization . In the radical polymerization of ethylene , its  bond is broken, and the two electrons rearrange to create a new propagating center like the one that attacked it. The form this propagating center takes depends on the specific type of addition mechanism. There are several mechanisms through which this can be initiated. The free radical mechanism is one of the first methods to be used. Free radicals are very reactive atoms or molecules that have unpaired electrons. Taking the polymerization of ethylene as an example, the free radical mechanism can be divided into three stages chain initiation , chain propagation , and chain termination . Polymerization of ethylene Free radical addition polymerization of ethylene must take place at high temperatures and pressures, approximately 300  C and 2000 atm. While most other free radical polymerizations do not require such extreme temperatures and pressures, they do tend to lack control. One effect of this lack of control is a high degree of branching. Also, as termination occurs randomly, when two chains collide, it is impossible to control the length of individual chains. A newer method of polymerization simila r to free radical, but allowing more control involves the ZieglerNatta catalyst , especially with respect to polymer branching . Other forms of chain growth polymerization include cationic addition polymerization and anionic addition polymerization . While not used to a large extent in industry yet due to stringent reaction conditions such as lack of water and oxygen, these methods provide ways to polymerize some monomers that cannot be polymerized by free radical methods such as polypropylene . Cationic and anionic mechanisms are also more ideally suited for living polymerizations , although free radical living polymerizations have also been developed. Esters of acrylic acid contain a carbon-carbon double bond which is conjugated to an ester group. This allows the possibility of both types of polymerization mechanism. An acrylic ester by itself can undergo chain-growth polymerization to form a homopolymer with a carbon-carbon backbone, such as polymethyl methacrylate . Also, however, certain acrylic esters can react with diamine monomers by nucleophilic conjugate addition of amine groups to acrylic CC bonds. In this case the polymerization proceeds by step-growth and the products are polybeta-amino ester copolymers , with backbones containing nitrogen as amine and oxygen as ester as well as carbon. 9  Physical polymer reaction engineering  edit  To produce a high-molecular-weight, uniform product, various methods are employed to better control the initiation, propagation, and termination rates during chain polymerization and also to remove excess concentrated heat during these exothermic reactions compared to polymerization of the pure monomer also referred to as bulk polymerization. These include emulsion polymerization , solution polymerization , suspension polymerization , and precipitation polymerization . Although the polymer polydispersity and molecular weight may be improved, these methods may introduce additional processing requirements to isolate the product from a solvent. Photopolymerization  edit  Main article Photopolymer Most photopolymerization reactions are chain-growth polymerizations which are initiated by the absorption of visible 10  or ultraviolet light. The light may be absorbed either directly by the reactant monomer  direct photopolymerization, or else by a photosensitizer which absorbs the light and then transfers energy to the monomer. In general only the initiation step differs from that of the ordinary thermal polymerization of the same monomer subsequent propagation, termination and chain transfer steps are unchanged. 11  In step-growth photopolymerization, absorption of light triggers an addition or condensation reaction between two comonomers that do not react without light. A propagation cycle is not initiated because each growth step requires the assistance of light. 12  Photopolymerization can be used as a photographic or printing process, because polymerization only occurs in regions which have been exposed to light. Unreacted monomer can be removed from unexposed regions, leaving a relief polymeric image. 11  Several forms of 3D printing including layer-by-layer stereolithography and two-photon absorption 3D photopolymerization use photopolymerization. 13  . Multiphoton polymerization using single pulses have also been demonstrated for fabrication of complex structures using a digital micromirror device . 14  See also  edit  Addition polymer Condensation polymer Cross-link Metallocene Plasma polymerization Polymer characterization Polymer physics Reversible additionfragmentation chain transfer polymerization Ring-opening polymerization Sequence-controlled polymers Sol-gel ZieglerNatta catalyst References  edit   Jenkins, A. D. Kratochvl, P. Stepto, R. F. T. Suter, U. W. 1996. Glossary of basic terms in polymer science IUPAC Recommendations 1996 PDF . Pure and Applied Chemistry . 68 12 22872311. doi  10.1351pac199668122287 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em See definition 3.1, p. 2305.  Young, R. J. 1987 Introduction to Polymers , Chapman  Hall ISBN   0-412-22170-5  International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry, et al. 2000 IUPAC Gold Book , Polymerization  a b c d e f g h Clayden, J., Greeves, N. and Warren, S. 2000. Organic chemistry , Oxford University Press ISBN   0198503466 pp. 14501466  Roberts, Durward T., JR. and Lawrence E. Calihan.  Polymerization Polycondensation of Alkanes over Fluosulfonic Acid and Antimony Pentafluoride . Journal of Macromolecular Science Part A - Chemistry Vol. 7 , Iss. 8, 1973  Cowie, J.M.G. 1991 Polymers Chemistry and Physics of Modern Materials , Chapman and Hall, p. 4 ISBN   0849398134  a b Allcock H.R., Lampe F.W. and Mark J.F. Contemporary Polymer Chemistry 3rd ed. Pearson Prentice-Hall 2003, p.29-30 ISBN   0-13-065056-0  a b Fried, Joel R. 2003. Polymer Science and Technology 2nd ed.. Prentice-Hall. p.  23. ISBN   0-13-018168-4 .  Lynn, David M. Langer, Robert 2000. Degradable Poly-amino esters Synthesis, Characterization, and Self-Assembly with Plasmid DNA. Journal of the American Chemical Society . 122 44 10761. doi  10.1021ja0015388 .  McKenzie, Thomas G. Fu, Qiang Wong, Edgar H. H. Dunstan, Dave E. Qiao, Greg G. 2015-06-23. Visible Light Mediated Controlled Radical Polymerization in the Absence of Exogenous Radical Sources or Catalysts. Macromolecules . 48 12 38643872. Bibcode  2015MaMol..48.3864M . doi  10.1021acs.macromol.5b00965 . ISSN   0024-9297 .  a b Allcock H.R., Lampe F.W. and Mark J.F. Contemporary Polymer Chemistry 3rd ed. Pearson Prentice-Hall 2003, chap.5. ISBN   0-13-065056-0  Soto, Marc Sebastin, Rosa Mara Marquet, Jordi 2014. Photochemical Activation of Extremely Weak Nucleophiles Highly Fluorinated Urethanes and Polyurethanes from Polyfluoro Alcohols. J. Org. Chem . 79 11 50195027. doi  10.1021jo5005789 . PMID   24820955 .  Additive manufacturing of ceramics from preceramic polymers. Additive Manufacturing . 27  8090. May 2019. doi  10.1016j.addma.2019.02.012 .  Mills, Benjamin Grant-Jacob, James A Feinaeugle, Matthias Eason, Robert W 2013-06-17. Single-pulse multiphoton polymerization of complex structures using a digital multimirror device PDF . Optics Express . 21 12 148538. Bibcode  2013OExpr..2114853M . doi  10.1364oe.21.014853 . ISSN   1094-4087 . PMID   23787672 . Authority control GND  4175300-8 NDL  00575079 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitlePolymerization oldid909904467  Categories  Polymerization reactions Hidden categories Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers