Riskbenefit ratio From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia    Redirected from Risk-benefit analysis  Jump to navigation Jump to search This article needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources   Riskbenefit ratio     news    newspapers    books    scholar    JSTOR  May 2012   Learn how and when to remove this template message  A riskbenefit ratio is the ratio of the risk of an action to its potential benefits. Riskbenefit analysis is analysis that seeks to quantify the risk and benefits and hence their ratio. Analyzing a risk can be heavily dependent on the human factor. A certain level of risk in our lives is accepted as necessary to achieve certain benefits. For example, driving an automobile is a risk most people take daily, also since it is mitigated by the controlling factor of their perception of their individual ability to manage the risk-creating situation. When individuals are exposed to involuntary risk a risk over which they have no control, they make risk aversion their primary goal. Under these circumstances individuals require the probability of risk to be as much as one thousand times smaller than for the same situation under their perceived control a notable example being the common bias in the perception of risk in flying vs. driving. 1  Contents 1 Evaluations 2 Medical research 3 See also 4 References Evaluations  edit  Evaluations of future risk can be Real future risk , as disclosed by the fully matured future circumstances when they develop. Statistical risk , as determined by currently available data, as measured actuarially for insurance premiums. Projected risk , as analytically based on system models structured from historical studies. Perceived risk , as intuitively seen by individuals. Medical research  edit  For research that involves more than minimal risk of harm to the subjects, the investigator must assure that the amount of benefit clearly outweighs the amount of risk. Only if there is a favorable riskbenefit ratio may a study be considered ethical . The Declaration of Helsinki , adopted by the World Medical Association , states that biomedical research cannot be done legitimately unless the importance of the objective is in proportion to the risk to the subject. The Helsinki Declaration 2  and the CONSORT Statement 3  stress a favorable riskbenefit ratio. See also  edit  Benefit shortfall Costbenefit analysis Odds algorithm Optimism bias Reference class forecasting References  edit   Risk-Benefit Analysis . Capita.wustl.edu. Archived from the original on 2013-10-29 . Retrieved 2013-10-25 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  World Medical Association Declaration of Helsinki Ethical Principles for Medical Research Involving Human Subjects  Consort . Consort-statement.org . Retrieved 2013-10-25 . v t e Clinical research and experimental design Overview Clinical trial Trial protocols Adaptive clinical trial Academic clinical trials Clinical study design Controlled study  EBM I to II-1 A to B  Randomized controlled trial Scientific experiment Blind experiment Open-label trial Observational study  EBM II-2 to II-3 B to C  Cross-sectional study vs. Longitudinal study , Ecological study Cohort study Retrospective Prospective Casecontrol study  Nested casecontrol study  Case series Case study Case report Measures Occurrence Incidence , Cumulative incidence , Prevalence , Point prevalence , Period prevalence Association Risk difference , Number needed to treat , Number needed to harm , Risk ratio , Relative risk reduction , Odds ratio , Hazard ratio Population impact Attributable fraction among the exposed , Attributable fraction for the population , Preventable fraction among the unexposed , Preventable fraction for the population Other Clinical endpoint , Virulence , Infectivity , Mortality rate , Morbidity , Case fatality rate , Specificity and sensitivity , Likelihood-ratios , Pre- and post-test probability Trialtest types In vitro In vivo Animal testing Animal testing on non-human primates First-in-man study Multicenter trial Seeding trial Vaccine trial Analysis of clinical trials Riskbenefit ratio Systematic review Replication Meta-analysis Intention-to-treat analysis Interpretation of results Selection bias Survivorship bias Correlation does not imply causation Null result Category Glossary List of topics Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleRiskbenefit_ratio oldid837173099  Categories  Risk analysis Ethics and statistics Medical statistics Hidden categories CS1 errors deprecated parameters Articles needing additional references from May 2012 All articles needing additional references