Project plan From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search This article needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources   Project plan     news    newspapers    books    scholar    JSTOR  March 2017   Learn how and when to remove this template message  A project plan , according to the Project Management Body of Knowledge PMBOK, is ...a formal, approved document used to guide both project execution and project control . The primary uses of the project plan are to document planning assumptions and decisions, facilitate communication among project stakeholders , and document approved scope , cost, and schedule baselines . A project plan may be summarized or detailed. 1   full citation needed  The latest edition of the PMBOK v5 uses the term project charter to refer to the contract that the project sponsor and project manager use to agree on the initial vision of the project scope, baseline, resources , objectives, etc. at a high level. In the PMI methodology described in the PMBOK v5, the project charter and the project management plan are the two most important documents for describing a project during the initiation and planning phases. PRINCE2 defines ...a statement of how and when a projects objectives are to be achieved, by showing the major products , milestones , activities and resources required on the project. The project manager creates the project management plan following input from the project team and key project stakeholders. The plan should be agreed and approved by at least the project team and its key stakeholders. Contents 1 Purpose 2 Plan contents 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Purpose  edit  The objective of a project plan is to define the approach to be used by the project team to deliver the intended project management scope of the project. At a minimum, a project plan answers basic questions about the project Why - What is the problem or value proposition addressed by the project Why is it being sponsored What - What is the work that will be performed on the project What are the major products deliverables  Who - Who will be involved and what will be their responsibilities within the project How will they be organized When - What is the project timeline and when will particularly meaningful points, referred to as milestones, be complete Plan contents  edit  To be a complete project plan according to industry standards such as the PMBOK or PRINCE2, the project plan must also describe the execution, management and control of the project. This information can be provided by referencing other documents that will be produced, such as a procurement plan or construction plan, or it may be detailed in the project plan itself. The project plan typically covers topics used in the project execution system and includes the following main aspects Scope management Requirements management Schedule management Financial management Quality management Resource management Stakeholder management  New from PMBOK 5 Communications management Project change management Risk management See also  edit  Project planning Project Plan Document References  edit   PMBOK, 2000 Edition External links  edit  Developing the Project Management Plan Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleProject_plan oldid850032364  Categories  Schedule project management Planning Hidden categories Articles needing additional references from March 2017 All articles needing additional references Articles with incomplete citations from July 2016