Environmental engineering From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Environmental engineering is a professional engineering discipline that takes from broad scientific topics like chemistry, biology, ecology, geology, hydraulics, hydrology, microbiology, and mathematics to create solutions that will protect and also improves the health of living organisms and improve the quality of the environment. 1  2  Environmental engineering is a sub-discipline of civil engineering and chemical engineering . Environmental engineering is the application of scientific and engineering principles to improve and maintain the environment to protect human health, protect natures beneficial ecosystems, and improve environmental-related enhancement of the quality of human life. 1  Environmental engineers devise solutions for waste water management , water and air pollution control, recycling, waste disposal , and public health . 2  3  They design municipal water supply and industrial wastewater treatment systems, 4  5  and design plans to prevent waterborne diseases and improve sanitation in urban, rural and recreational areas. They evaluate hazardous- waste management systems to evaluate the severity of such hazards, advise on treatment and containment, and develop regulations to prevent mishaps. They implement environmental engineering law , as in assessing the environmental impact of proposed construction projects. Environmental engineers study the effect of technological advances on the environment, addressing local and worldwide environmental issues such as acid rain , global warming , ozone depletion , water pollution and air pollution from automobile exhausts and industrial sources . 2  6  7  8  Most jurisdictions impose licensing and registration requirements for qualified environmental engineers. 9  10  11  Contents 1 History 1.1 Ancient civilizations 1.2 Modern era 2 Education 2.1 Curriculum 3 Applications 3.1 Water supply and treatment 3.2 Wastewater treatment 3.3 Air pollution management 3.4 Environmental impact assessment and mitigation 4 Regulatory agencies 4.1 Environmental Protection Agency 5 See also 5.1 Associations 6 References History  edit  Further information History of water supply and sanitation Ancient civilizations  edit  Environmental engineering is a name for work that has been done since early civilizations, as people learned to modify and control the environmental conditions to meet needs. 3  12  As people recognized that their health was related to the quality of their environment , they built systems to improve it. 3  The ancient Indus Valley Civilization 3300 B.C.E. to 1300 B.C.E. had advanced control over their water resources. 12  The public work structures found at various sites in the area include wells, public baths,water storage tanks, a drinking water system, and a city-wide sewage collection system. 12  13  They also had an early canal irrigation system enabling large-scale agriculture. 14  From 4000 to 2000 B.C.E., many civilizations had drainage systems and some had sanitation facilities, including the Mesopotamian Empire , Mohenjo-Daro , Egypt, Crete, and the Orkney Islands in Scotland. 3  The Greeks also had aqueducts and sewer systems that used rain and wastewater to irrigate and fertilize fields. 3  The first aqueduct in Rome was constructed in 312 B.C.E., and from there, they continued to construct aqueducts for irrigation and safe urban water supply during droughts. 3  They also built an underground sewer system as early as the 7th century B.C.E. that fed into the Tiber River, draining marshes to create farmland as well as removing sewage from the city. 3  12  Modern era  edit  Very little change was seen from the fall of Rome until the 19th century, where improvements saw increasing efforts focused on public health. 12  15  Modern environmental engineering began in London in the mid-19th century when Joseph Bazalgette designed the first major sewerage system following the Great Stink . 12  The citys sewer system conveyed raw sewage to the River Thames , which also supplied the majority of the citys drinking water, leading to an outbreak of cholera . 12  The introduction of drinking water treatment and sewage treatment in industrialized countries reduced waterborne diseases from leading causes of death to rarities. 16  The field emerged as a separate academic discipline during the middle of the 20th century in response to widespread public concern about water and air pollution and other environmental degradation. As society and technology grew more complex, they increasingly produced unintended effects on the natural environment. One example is the widespread application of the pesticide DDT to control agricultural pests in the years following World War II . While the agricultural benefits were outstanding and crop yields increased dramatically, reducing world hunger, and malaria was controlled better than ever before, the pesticide brought numerous bird species to the edge of extinction due to its impact on their reproductive cycle. The story of DDT as vividly told in Rachel Carson s Silent Spring 1962 is considered to be the birth of the modern environmental movement, 17  which led to the modern field of environmental engineering. Education  edit  Many universities offer environmental engineering programs through either the department of civil engineering or chemical engineering and also including electronic projects to develop and balance the environmental conditions. Environmental engineers in a civil engineering program often focus on hydrology, water resources management, bioremediation , and water and wastewater treatment plant design. Environmental engineers in a chemical engineering program tend to focus on environmental chemistry, advanced air and water treatment technologies, and separation processes.  citation needed  Some subdivisions of environmental engineering include natural resources engineering and agricultural engineering . Courses for students fall into a few broad classes Mechanical engineering courses oriented towards designing machines and mechanical systems for environmental use such as water and wastewater treatment facilities, pumping stations, garbage segregation plants, and other mechanical facilities. Environmental engineering or environmental systems courses oriented towards a civil engineering approach in which structures and the landscape are constructed to blend with or protect the environment. Environmental chemistry , sustainable chemistry or environmental chemical engineering courses oriented towards understanding the effects of chemicals in the environment, including any mining processes, pollutants, and also biochemical processes. Environmental technology courses oriented towards producing electronic or electrical graduates capable of developing devices and artifacts able to monitor, measure, model and control environmental impact, including monitoring and managing energy generation from renewable sources . Curriculum  edit  The following topics make up a typical curriculum in environmental engineering 18  Mass and Energy transfer Environmental chemistry Inorganic chemistry Organic Chemistry Nuclear Chemistry Growth models Resource consumption Population growth Economic growth Risk assessment Hazard identification Dose-response Assessment Exposure assessment Risk characterization Comparative risk analysis Water pollution Water resources and pollutants Oxygen demand Pollutant transport Water and waste water treatment Air pollution Industry, transportation , commercial and residential emissions Criteria and toxic air pollutants Pollution modelling e.g. Atmospheric dispersion modeling  Pollution control Air pollution and meteorology Global change Greenhouse effect and global temperature Carbon , nitrogen , and oxygen cycle IPCC emissions scenarios Oceanic changes  ocean acidification , other effects of global warming on oceans  and changes in the stratosphere see Physical impacts of climate change  Solid waste management and resource recovery Life cycle assessment Source reduction Collection and transfer operations Recycling Waste-to-energy conversion Landfill Applications  edit  Water supply and treatment  edit  Environmental engineers evaluate the water balance within a watershed and determine the available water supply, the water needed for various needs in that watershed, the seasonal cycles of water movement through the watershed and they develop systems to store, treat, and convey water for various uses. Water is treated to achieve water quality objectives for the end uses. In the case of a potable water supply, water is treated to minimize the risk of infectious disease transmission, the risk of non-infectious illness, and to create a palatable water flavor. Water distribution systems are designed and built to provide adequate water pressure and flow rates to meet various end-user needs such as domestic use, fire suppression, and irrigation . Wastewater treatment  edit  Sewage treatment plant, Australia There are numerous wastewater treatment technologies. A wastewater treatment train can consist of a primary clarifier system to remove solid and floating materials, a secondary treatment system consisting of an aeration basin followed by flocculation and sedimentation or an activated sludge system and a secondary clarifier, a tertiary biological nitrogen removal system, and a final disinfection process. The aeration basinactivated sludge system removes organic material by growing bacteria activated sludge. The secondary clarifier removes the activated sludge from the water. The tertiary system, although not always included due to costs, is becoming more prevalent to remove nitrogen and phosphorus and to disinfect the water before discharge to a surface water stream or ocean outfall. 19  Air pollution management  edit  Scientists have developed air pollution dispersion models to evaluate the concentration of a pollutant at a receptor or the impact on overall air quality from vehicle exhausts and industrial flue gas stack emissions. To some extent, this field overlaps the desire to decrease carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gas emissions from combustion processes. Environmental impact assessment and mitigation  edit  Main article Environmental impact assessment Water pollution Environmental engineers apply scientific and engineering principles to evaluate if there are likely to be any adverse impacts to water quality, air quality, habitat quality, flora and fauna , agricultural capacity, traffic , ecology, and noise. If impacts are expected, they then develop mitigation measures to limit or prevent such impacts. An example of a mitigation measure would be the creation of wetlands in a nearby location to mitigate the filling in of wetlands necessary for a road development if it is not possible to reroute the road. In the United States, the practice of environmental assessment was formally initiated on January 1, 1970, the effective date of the National Environmental Policy Act NEPA. Since that time, more than 100 developing and developed nations either have planned specific analogous laws or have adopted procedure used elsewhere. NEPA is applicable to all federal agencies in the United States. 20  Regulatory agencies  edit  Environmental Protection Agency  edit  The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency EPA is one of the many agencies that work with environmental engineers to solve key issues. An important component of EPAs mission is to protect and improve air, water, and overall environmental quality in order to avoid or mitigate the consequences of harmful effects. See also  edit  Environment portal Ecology portal At Wikiversity , you can learn more and teach others about Environmental engineering at the Department of Environmental engineering Atmospheric dispersion modeling Biofiltration Civil engineering Ecological sanitation Ecological engineering Engineering geology Environmental design Environmental engineering law Environmental engineering science Environmental health Environmental impact assessment Environmental management Environmental restoration Environmental science Environmental studies Geoprofessions Hydraulic engineering Hydrology List of environmental degrees List of environmental engineers Sanitary engineering Water purification Water quality modeling Associations  edit  American Academy of Environmental Engineers and Scientists Association of Environmental Engineering and Science Professors Association of Environmental Professionals Atmospheric dispersion modeling Confederation of European Environmental Engineering Societies Institute of Environmental Management and Assessment Society of Environmental Engineers References  edit   a b Careers in Environmental Engineering and Environmental Science . American Academy of Environmental Engineers  Scientists . Retrieved 2019-03-23 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  a b c Architecture and Engineering Occupations . Occupational Outlook Handbook . Bureau of Labor Statistics. 20 February 2019 . Retrieved 23 March 2019 .  a b c d e f g 10 Advancements in Environmental Engineering . HowStuffWorks . 2014-05-18 . Retrieved 2019-03-23 .  Beychok, Milton R. 1967. Aqueous Wastes from Petroleum and Petrochemical Plants 1st ed.. John Wiley  Sons. LCCN 67019834.  Tchobanoglous, G. Burton, F.L.  Stensel, H.D. 2003. Wastewater Engineering Treatment Disposal Reuse  Metcalf  Eddy, Inc 4th ed.. McGraw-Hill Book Company. ISBN   978-0-07-041878-3 .  Turner, D.B. 1994. Workbook of atmospheric dispersion estimates an introduction to dispersion modeling 2nd ed.. CRC Press. ISBN   978-1-56670-023-8 .  Beychok, M.R. 2005. Fundamentals Of Stack Gas Dispersion 4th ed.. author-published. ISBN   978-0-9644588-0-2 .  Career Information Center. Agribusiness, Environment, and Natural Resources 9th ed.. Macmillan Reference. 2007.  Become Board Certified in Environmental Engineering . American Academy of Environmental Engineers  Scienteists . Retrieved 2019-03-23 .  NCEES PE Environmental exam information . NCEES . Retrieved 2019-03-23 .  Professional Engineering Institutions . Engineering Council . Retrieved 2019-03-23 .  a b c d e f g Mason, Matthew. Environmental Engineering Why Its Vital for Our Future . Environmental Science . Retrieved 2019-03-23 .  Jansen, M. October 1989. Water Supply and Sewage Disposal at Mohenjo-Daro. World Archaeology . 21 2 177192. doi  10.108000438243.1989.9980100 . JSTOR   124907 . PMID   16470995 .  Angelakis, Andreas N. Rose, Joan B. 2014. Chapter 2 Sanitation and wastewater technologies in HarappaIndus valley civilization ca. 2600-1900 BC. Evolution of Sanitation and Wastewater Technologies through the Centuries . IWA Publishing. pp.  2540. ISBN   9781780404851 .  Funding - Environmental Engineering . US National Science Foundation . Retrieved 2013-07-01 .  Waterborne Infections . Encyclopedia.com . Retrieved 2019-03-23 .  Radniecki, Tyler. What is Environmental Engineering . College of Engineering . Oregon State University . Retrieved 2019-03-23 .  Masters, Gilbert 2008. Introduction to environmental engineering and science . Upper Saddle River, N.J Prentice Hall. ISBN   978-0-13-148193-0 .  Sims, J. 2003. Activated sludge, Environmental Encyclopedia . Detroit.  McGraw-Hill Encyclopedia of Environmental Science and Engineering 3rd ed.. McGraw-Hill, Inc. 1993. Davis, M. L. and D. A. Cornwell, 2006 Introduction to environmental engineering 4th ed. McGraw-Hill ISBN   978-0072424119 v t e Engineering Civil Architectural Construction Environmental Earthquake Geotechnical Hydraulic Mining Structural Transportation Mechanical Acoustical Aerospace Automotive Marine Railway Thermal Electrical Computer Control Electromechanics Electronics Microwaves Power Radio Frequency Telecommunications Chemical Biochemical Biological Molecular Petroleum Process Reaction Interdisciplinary Audio Biomedical Engineering mathematics Engineering mechanics Engineering physics Engineering science Fire Industrial Information Materials science Ceramics Metallurgy Polymer Mechatronics Military Nanotechnology Nuclear Optical Photonics Privacy Robotics Sanitary Security Software Systems Glossaries Engineering Aerospace engineering Civil engineering Electrical and electronics engineering Mechanical engineering Structural engineering List of engineering branches CategoryEngineering Engineering portal v t e Sustainability Outline History Index Principles Anthropocene Earth system governance Ecological modernization Environmental governance Environmentalism Global catastrophic risk Human impact on the environment Planetary boundaries Social sustainability Stewardship Sustainable development Consumption Anthropization Anti-consumerism Earth Overshoot Day Ecological footprint Ethical Over-consumption Simple living Sustainability advertising Sustainability brand Sustainability marketing myopia Sustainable Systemic change resistance Tragedy of the commons Population Birth control Family planning Control Overpopulation Zero growth Technology Appropriate Environmental Sustainable Biodiversity Biosecurity Biosphere Conservation biology Deep ecology Endangered species Holocene extinction Invasive species Energy Carbon footprint Climate change mitigation Conservation Descent Efficiency Emissions trading Fossil-fuel phase-out Peak oil Poverty Rebound effect Renewable Food Forest gardening Local Permaculture Security Sustainable agriculture Sustainable fishery Urban horticulture Water Conservation Crisis Efficiency Footprint Reclaimed Accountability Sustainability accounting Sustainability measurement Sustainability metrics and indices Sustainability reporting Standards and certification Sustainable yield Applications Advertising Architecture Art Business City College programs Community Design Ecovillage Education for Sustainable Development Fashion Gardening Geopark Green marketing Industries Landscape architecture Living Low-impact development Sustainable market Organizations Packaging Practices Procurement Tourism Transport Urban drainage systems Urban infrastructure Urbanism Management Environmental Fisheries Forest Materials Natural resource Planetary Waste Agreements and conferences UN Conference on the Human Environment Stockholm 1972 Brundtlandt Commission Report 1983 Our Common Future 1987 Earth Summit 1992 Rio Declaration on Environment and Development 1992 Agenda 21 1992 Convention on Biological Diversity 1992 ICPD Programme of Action 1994 Lisbon Principles 1997 Kyoto Protocol 1997 Earth Charter 2000 UN Millennium Declaration 2000 Earth Summit 2002 Rio10, Johannesburg UN Conference on Sustainable Development Rio20, 2012 Sustainable Development Goals 2015 Paris Agreement 2015 UN Ocean Conference 2017 Category Lists Science Studies Degrees v t e Environmental science Main fields Atmospheric sciences Biogeochemistry Ecology Environmental chemistry Geosciences Hydrology Limnology Oceanography Soil science Related fields Biology Chemistry green Ecological economics Environmental design Environmental economics Environmental engineering Environmental health epidemiology Environmental studies Environmental toxicology Geodesy Physics Sustainability science Systems ecology Urban ecology Applications Energy conservation Environmental technology Natural resource management Pollution control Recycling Remediation Renewable energy Road ecology Sewage treatment Urban metabolism Water purification Waste management Lists Degrees Journals Research institutes Glossary See also Human impact on the environment Sustainability Category scientists Commons Environment portal WikiProject v t e Human impact on the environment General Environmental issues list of issues Human impact Impact assessment Planetary boundaries Causes Agriculture fishing irrigation meat production cocoa production palm oil Energy industry biofuels biodiesel coal electricity generation nuclear power oil shale petroleum reservoirs wind power Genetic pollution Industrialisation Land use Manufacturing cleaning agents concrete plastics nanotechnology paint paper pesticides pharmaceuticals and personal care Mining Overdrafting Overfishing Overgrazing Overexploitation Overpopulation Particulates Pollution Quarrying Reservoirs Tourism Transport aviation roads shipping Urbanization urban sprawl War Effects Biodiversity threats biodiversity loss decline in amphibian populations decline in insect populations Climate change global warming runaway climate change Coral reefs Deforestation Defaunation Desertification Ecocide Erosion Environmental degradation Freshwater cycle Habitat destruction Holocene extinction Nitrogen cycle Land degradation Land consumption Land surface effects on climate Loss of green belts Phosphorus cycle Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Resource depletion Water degradation Water scarcity Mitigation Birth control Cleaner production Climate change mitigation Climate engineering Community resilience Decoupling Ecological engineering Environmental engineering Environmental mitigation Industrial ecology Mitigation banking Organic farming Reforestation urban Restoration ecology Sustainable consumption Waste minimization   Commons   Category by country assessment mitigation Authority control BNE  XX524846 BNF  cb11976343v data GND  4061650-2 LCCN  sh85044170 NARA  10640818 NDL  00564909 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleEnvironmental_engineering oldid912974179  Categories  Chemical engineering Civil engineering Environmental engineering Environmental science Engineering disciplines Environmental terminology Hidden categories All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2014 Wikipedia articles with BNE identifiers Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers Wikipedia articles with NARA identifiers Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers ModuleInterwiki additional interwiki links