Drug delivery From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search For the scientific journal, see Drug Delivery journal . A nasal spray bottle being demonstrated. Drug delivery refers to approaches, formulations, technologies, and systems for transporting a pharmaceutical compound in the body as needed to safely achieve its desired therapeutic effect . 1  It may involve scientific site-targeting within the body, or it might involve facilitating systemic pharmacokinetics  in any case, it is typically concerned with both quantity and duration of drug presence. Drug delivery is often approached via a drugs chemical formulation, but it may also involve medical devices or drug-device combination products. Drug delivery is a concept heavily integrated with dosage form and route of administration , the latter sometimes even being considered part of the definition. 2  Drug delivery technologies modify drug release profile, absorption, distribution and elimination for the benefit of improving product efficacy and safety, as well as patient convenience and compliance. Drug release is from diffusion, degradation, swelling, and affinity-based mechanisms. 3  4  Some of the common routes of administration include the enteral gastrointestinal tract, parenteral via injections, inhalation, transdermal, topical and oral routes. 5  6  Many medications such as peptide and protein , antibody , vaccine and gene based drugs, in general may not be delivered using these routes because they might be susceptible to enzymatic degradation or can not be absorbed into the systemic circulation efficiently due to molecular size and charge issues to be therapeutically effective. For this reason many protein and peptide drugs have to be delivered by injection or a nanoneedle array. For example, many immunizations are based on the delivery of protein drugs and are often done by injection. Current efforts in the area of drug delivery include the development of targeted delivery in which the drug is only active in the target area of the body for example, in cancerous tissues, sustained release formulations in which the drug is released over a period of time in a controlled manner from a formulation, and methods to increase survival of peroral agents which must pass through the stomachs acidic environment. In order to achieve efficient targeted delivery, the designed system must avoid the hosts defense mechanisms and circulate to its intended site of action. 7  Types of sustained release formulations include liposomes , drug loaded biodegradable microspheres and drug polymer conjugates. Survival of agents as they pass through the stomach typically is an issue for agents which cannot be encased in a solid tablet one research area has been around the utilization of lipid isolates from the acid-resistant archaea Sulfolobus islandicus , which confers on the order of 10 survival of liposome-encapsulated agents. 8  See also  edit  Thin film drug delivery Magnetic drug delivery Self-microemulsifying drug delivery system Acoustic targeted drug delivery Neural drug delivery systems Drug delivery to the brain Drug carrier Bovine submaxillary mucin coatings Retrometabolic drug design Bioavailability Asymmetric membrane capsule References  edit   Drug Delivery Systems definition . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Drug delivery - definition of drug delivery by Medical dictionary . TheFreeDictionary.com .  Smart Materials for Drug Delivery Set, Editors Carmen Alvarez-Lorenzo, Angel Concheiro, Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge 2013, httpspubs.rsc.orgencontentebook978-1-84973-552-0  Wang, NX. von Recum, HA 2011. Affinity-Based Drug Delivery. Macromol Biosci . 11 3 321332. doi  10.1002mabi.201000206 . PMID   21108454 .  COMMON ROUTES OF DRUG ADMINISTRATION . Retrieved 2018-10-04 .  The administration of medicines . Retrieved 2018-10-04 .  Bertrand N, Leroux JC. 2011. The journey of a drug carrier in the body an anatomo-physiological perspective. Journal of Controlled Release . 161 2 15263. doi  10.1016j.jconrel.2011.09.098 . PMID   22001607 .  Staff 2015. Acid-friendly Microbe Finds Application in Drug Delivery. American Laboratory paper. 47 9. p.  7. ISSN   0044-7749 . External links  edit  Article in Chemical and Engineering News v t e Routes of administration , dosage forms Oral Digestive tract  enteral  Solids Pill Tablet Capsule Pastille Time release technology Osmotic delivery system OROS Liquids Decoction Elixir Electuary Emulsion Extended-release syrup Effervescent powder or tablet Herbal tea Hydrogel Molecular encapsulation Powder Softgel Solution Suspension Syrup Syrup Concentrate for dilution andor addition of carbonated water Tincture Buccal  sublabial , sublingual Solids Orally disintegrating tablet ODT Film Lollipop Sublingual drops Lozenges Effervescent buccal tablet Chewing gum Liquids Mouthwash Toothpaste Ointment Oral spray Respiratory tract Solids Smoking device Dry-powder inhaler DPI 0 0 Liquids Anaesthetic vaporizer Vaporizer Nebulizer Metered-dose inhaler MDI Gas Oxygen mask and Nasal cannula Oxygen concentrator Anaesthetic machine Relative analgesia machine Ophthalmic , otologic , nasal Nasal spray Ear drops Eye drops Ointment Hydrogel Nanosphere suspension Insufflation Mucoadhesive microdisc microsphere tablet Urogenital Ointment Pessary vaginal suppository Vaginal ring Vaginal douche Intrauterine device IUD Extra-amniotic infusion Intravesical infusion Rectal  enteral  Ointment Suppository Enema Solution Hydrogel Murphy drip Nutrient enema Dermal Ointment Topical cream Topical gel Liniment Paste Film DMSO drug solution Electrophoretic dermal delivery system Hydrogel Liposomes Transfersome vesicles Cream Lotion Lip balm Medicated shampoo Dermal patch Transdermal patch Contact rubbed into break in the skin Transdermal spray Jet injector Injection , infusion into tissueblood Skin Intradermal Subcutaneous Transdermal implant Organs Intracavernous Intravitreal Intra-articular injection Transscleral Central nervous system Intracerebral Intrathecal Epidural Circulatory , musculoskeletal Intravenous Intracardiac Intramuscular Intraosseous Intraperitoneal Nanocell injection Patient-controlled analgesia pump PIC line v t e Topics in medicinal chemistry ADME Bioavailability Chemogenomics Drug class Drug delivery Drug design Drug discovery Drug targeting Enzyme inhibitor Ligand efficiency Mechanism of action Mode of action New chemical entity Pharmacodynamics Pharmacokinetics Pharmacology Pharmacophore Quantitative structure-activity relationship Authority control LCCN  sh88007108 NDL  01119286 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleDrug_delivery oldid902220815  Categories  Medical equipment Hidden categories Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers