WikipediaCitation needed From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Wikipedia information page This is an information page . It describes the editing communitys established practice on some aspect or aspects of WikipediaVerifiability policy . It is not one of Wikipedias policies or guidelines , as it has not been thoroughly vetted by the community . .mw-parser-output .module-shortcutboxplainfloatrightborder1px solid aaabackgroundfffmargin0 0 0 1empadding0.3em 0.6em 0.2em 0.6emtext-aligncenterfont-size85font-weightbold.mw-parser-output .module-shortcutlistdisplayinline-blockborder-bottom1px solid aaamargin-bottom0.2emfont-weightnormal.mw-parser-output .module-shortcutanchordivpositionrelative top-3em.mw-parser-output li .module-shortcutanchordivfloatright Shortcut WPCITENEED A complete version of the documentation for this template is provided at TemplateCitation needed . The   Citation needed   template aims to promote accountable discourse. To ensure that all Wikipedia content is verifiable , anyone may question an uncited claim . If your work has been tagged, please provide a reliable source for the statement, and discuss if needed. You can add a citation by selecting from the drop-down menu at the top of the editing box . In markup , you can add a citation manually using ref tags . There are also more elaborate ways to cite sources . In wiki markup , you can question an uncited claim by inserting a simple   Citation needed   tag, or a more comprehensive  Citation needed reason Your explanation here dateAugust 2019   clause    fact   and   cn   will produce the same result. This displays as .mw-parser-output .templatequoteoverflowhiddenmargin1em 0padding0 40px.mw-parser-output .templatequote .templatequoteciteline-height1.5emtext-alignleftpadding-left1.6emmargin-top0 Example 87 of statistics are made up on the spot.  citation needed  Citation needed statements are part of Wikipedias backlog of outstanding problems . Currently there are 367,352 articles with Citation needed statements see the historical number of tags . You can help reduce the backlog Contents 1 When and how to use this tag 2 When not to use this tag 3 If your work has been tagged 4 How to help reduce the backlog 5 See also 6 External links When and how to use this tag A citation needed tag is a request for another editor to verify a statement  a form of communication between members of a collaborative editing community. It is never, in itself, an improvement of an article. Though readers may be alerted by a citation needed that a particular statement is not supported, many readers dont fully understand the communitys processes. Not all tags get addressed in a timely manner, staying in place for months or year s, forming an ever growing Wikipedia backlog this itself can be a problem. Best practice recommends the following Tag thoughtfully. Avoid hit-and-run or pointed tagging . Try to be courteous and consider the hypothetical fellow-editor who will, we hope, notice your tag and try to find the citation you have requested. When adding a tag, ask yourself Is it clear just what information you want cited Is the information probably factual If it is not, then it needs deletion or correction rather than citation Is the knowledge so self-evident that it really does not need to be cited at all Some things do not. Some tags are inserted by people well placed to find a suitable citation themselves. If this is the case, consider adding these articles to your watchlist or a worklist so that you can revisit the article when you have the opportunity to fix the verifiability problems yourself. When not to use this tag Before adding a tag, at least consider the following alternatives, one of which may prove much more constructive Do not use this tag because you dont understand a statement , or feel that non-expert readers are likely to be confused . Use   Clarify  ,   Explain  ,   Confusing  ,   Examples  ,   Why   or   Non sequitur  , as appropriate, instead. If the content is nonsense or is unlikely to be true, be bold and delete it  Do not tag controversial material about living people that is unsourced or poorly sourced. Remove it immediately Per WPDIARY , do not tag excessively trivial claims. Remove them. If you are sure the statement you want to tag is not factual, even if it does not come under either of the preceding headings, it may still be appropriate to simply remove the text delete it. Be sure to add a suitable edit summary such as Very doubtful  please add a citation if you return the content. If the original statement was accurate after all, this gives someone th e chance to put it back, hopefully with a proper citation this time. If a statement sounds plausible, and is consistent with other statements in the article, but you doubt that it is totally accurate, then consider making a reasonable effort to find a reference yourself. In the process, you may end up confirming that the statement needs to be edited or deleted to better reflect the best knowledge about the topic. If an article, or a section within an article, is under-referenced, then consider adding an   Unreferenced  ,   Refimprove  , or   Unreferenced section   tag to the article or section concerned  these tags allow you to indicate more systemic problems to the page. A reference at the end of a paragraph typically refers to the whole paragraph, and similarly a reference at the end of a sentence may almost always be taken as referring to the whole sentence. If a particular part of a sentence or paragraph seems to require a separate citation, or looks as if it may have been inserted into the text at a sentence or paragraph level, try to check the original reference rather than adding tags to text that may already be well referenced. The extra parameters available in the   Citation needed span   template may allow you to indicate which section you want to refer to. Do not insert a Citation needed tag to make a point, to pay back another editor, or because you dont like a subject, a particular article, or another editor . If your work has been tagged If you can provide a reliable source for the claim, then please add it If you are not sure how to do this, then give it your best try and replace the Citation needed template with enough information to locate the source. You may leave the copyediting or Wikifying to someone else, or learn more about citing sources on Wikipedia . This beginners referencing guide for Wikipedia provides a brief introduction on how to reference Wikipedia articles. If someone tagged your contributions with a Citation needed tag or tags, and you disagree, discuss the matter on the articles talk page . The most constructive thing to do in most cases is probably to supply the references requested, even if you feel the tags are overdone or unnecessary. How to help reduce the backlog A gif showing how to fix a citation needed by adding a reference Currently, there are over 367,352 articles with Citation needed statements. You can browse the whole list of these articles at CategoryAll articles with unsourced statements . Frequently the authors of statements do not return to Wikipedia to support the statement with citations, so other Wikipedia editors have to do work checking those statements. With 367,352 statements that need WPVerification , sometimes its hard to choose which article to work on. The tool Citation Hunt makes that easier by suggesting random articles, which you can sort by topical category membership. I can help Give me a random citation to find See also TemplateCitation needed TemplateCitation needed span TemplateVerify source TemplateUnreferenced for an article rather than an individual statement which does not cite any references or sources. TemplateMore citations needed for an article rather than an individual statement that has some citations, but not enough. Template messages  Sources of articles Inline verifiability and sources cleanup templates WikipediaVerification methods  listing examples of the most common ways that citations are used in Wikipedia articles WikipediaCiting sourcesExample edits for different methods  showing comparative edit mode representations for different citation methods and techniques. WikipediaCitation templates  a full listing of various styles for citing all sorts of materials CategoryAll articles with unsourced statements  list of all pages with   citation needed   External links Media related to Citation needed at Wikimedia Commons v t e Inline cleanup tags Attribution   According to whom     Attribution needed     By whom     From whom     Like whom     To whom     Who     With whom   Clarity   Ambiguous     Clarify     Clarify span     Clarify timeframe     Context inline     Expand acronym     Incomprehensible inline     Non sequitur     Which calendar   Precision   By how much     Definition     Definition needed     Example needed     Explain     How     How often     Quantify     Specify     Vague     When     Where     Which     Who else     Why     Year needed   Excessive   Duplication span     Importance inline     Relevance inline     Undue weight inline   Miscellaneous   Chinese script needed inline     Copyright violation     Copyvio link     Disambiguation needed     Needs IPA     Original research inline     Pronunciation needed     Siadn     Synthesis inline     Synthesis inline span     Verify spelling     Whose translation   Neutrality   Buzzword inline     Editorializing     Lopsided     Peacock term     POV statement     Weasel inline     Weasel word some span   Time-sensitivity   Anachronism inline     Clarify timeframe     Is this date calibrated     Update after     Update inline     Update inline span   Verifiability Dubious   Contradict-inline     Disputed inline     Dubious     Dubious span     Inconsistent   Missing or problematic reference   Additional citation needed     Better source     Better source example     Check quotation     Chronology citation needed     Citation needed     Citation needed lead     Citation needed span     Citation not found     COI source     Deprecated inline     Excessive citations inline     Failed verification     Failed verification span     Irrelevant citation     Medical citation needed     Medical citation needed span     Nonspecific     Obsolete source     Primary source inline     Promotional source     Quote without source     Request quotation     Retracted     Scientific citation needed     Self-published inline     Tertiary source inline     Third-party inline     Unreliable fringe source     Unreliable medical source     Unreliable source     Verify quote     Verify source   Incomplete or broken citation   Author incomplete     Author missing     Bare URL inline     Date missing     Dead link     Edition needed     Episode needed     Full citation needed     Incomplete short citation     ISBN missing     Page needed     Place missing     Publisher missing     Season needed     Time needed     Title incomplete     Title missing     Volume needed     Year missing   Wording   Awkward     Buzzword inline     Copy edit inline     Technical statement   General advice Citing sources Reliable sources Maintenance template removal Citation needed Find sources Combining sources Referencing styles Inline cleanup templates   WikiProject Inline Templates v t e Wikipedia referencing Policies and guidelines Verifiability Biographies of living persons Reliable sources Medicine Citing sources Scientific citations General advice Citation needed Find sources Combining sources Offline sources Referencing styles Citing sources Citation Style 1 Citation Style 2 Citation Style Vancouver LSA Comics Citation templates Reflist template Inline citations Footnotes Parenthetical referencing Punctuation and footnotes Shortened footnotes Nesting footnotes Help for beginners Reference-tags Citations quick reference Introduction to referencing Referencing with citation templates Referencing without using templates Referencing dos and donts Citing Wikipedia Advanced help Cite link labels Citation tools Cite errors Cite messages Converting between references formats Reference display customization References and page numbers Template documentation   Edit refs     Refref     Refref2     Refstart   Tools Wikipedia Library Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleWikipediaCitation_needed oldid913071752  Categories  Wikipedia information pages Citation and verifiability maintenance templates Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia quick introductions Hidden categories Wikipedia pages under 30-500 editing restriction Wikipedia move-protected project pages Project pages with short description