Outsourcing From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia    Redirected from Offshore outsourcing  Jump to navigation Jump to search Not to be confused with Offshoring . Outsourcing is an agreement in which one company hires another company to be responsible for a planned or existing activity that is or could be done internally, 1  2  and sometimes involves transferring employees and assets from one firm to another. The term outsourcing , which came from the phrase outside resourcing , originated no later than 1981. 3  4  5  The concept, which The Economist says made its presence felt since the time of the Second World War, 6  often involves the contracting of a business process e.g., payroll processing, claims processing, operational, andor non-core functions, such as manufacturing, facility management , call center call centre support. Outsourcing is also the practice of handing over control of public services to private enterprises , 7  even if on a short-term limited basis. 8  Outsourcing includes both foreign and domestic contracting, 9  and sometimes includes offshoring relocating a business function to a distant country 10  or nearshoring transferring a business process to a nearby country. Offshoring and outsourcing are not mutually inclusive there can be one without the other. They can be intertwined Offshore outsourcing, and can be individually or jointly, partially or completely reversed, 11  involving terms such as reshoring, inshoring, and insourcing. Contents 1 Terminology 1.1 Acronyms 2 Overview 2.1 Motivations 2.2 Agreements 3 History 3.1 20th century 3.1.1 IT-enabled services offshore outsourcing 3.2 Early 21st century 3.2.1 Limitations due to growth 3.2.2 Offshore alternatives 3.3 Growth of white-collar outsourcing 4 Reasons for outsourcing 5 Outsourcing models 5.1 Innovation outsourcing 5.2 Co-sourcing 5.2.1 Identity management co-sourcing 5.2.2 Offshore Software R D Co-sourcing 5.2.2.1 Countries involved in outsourced software R D 6 Usability issues in offshore development 6.1 Legal issues 6.2 2000-2012 R D 6.3 Future trends 6.3.1 Changed government outsourcing focus 7 Implications 7.1 Performance measurement 7.2 Management processes 7.2.1 Communications and customer service 7.2.2 Governance 7.2.3 Security 7.2.4 Information Technology 8 Issues and reversals 8.1 Insourcing 8.1.1 Regional insourcing 8.1.2 Net effect on jobs 8.1.3 Insourcing crossbreeds 8.1.4 In the United States 8.2 Standpoint of labor 8.3 Standpoint of government 8.3.1 Government response 8.3.2 Policy-making strategy 8.3.2.1 Competitiveness 8.3.2.2 Industrial policy 8.3.2.3 Environmental policy 8.4 Success stories 8.5 Globalization and socio-economic implications 8.5.1 Industrialization 8.5.2 Growth and income 9 By location 9.1 United States 9.2 Europe 9.3 European Union 9.4 Labor issues in Japan 9.5 China 9.6 Asia 9.7 Defining Near 9.7.1 Nearshoring 9.7.2 Nearsourcing 10 Reasons to near-source 10.1 Culture 10.2 Communication 10.2.1 Overview 11 Visa requirements 12 Examples 12.1 Print and mail outsourcing 12.2 Marketing outsourcing 12.3 Business process outsourcing 12.3.1 BPO caveats 12.3.2 Technological pressures 12.3.3 Industry size 13 See also 14 References 15 Further reading 16 External links Terminology  edit  Offshoring is moving the work to a distant country. If the distant workplace is a foreign subsidiaryowned by the company, then the offshore operation is a captive , 12  sometimes referred to as in-house offshore. 13  Insourcing entails bringing processes handled by third-party firms in-house, and is sometimes accomplished via vertical integration . Offshore outsourcing is the practice of hiring an external organization to perform some business functions Outsourcing in a country other than the one where the products or services are actually performed, developed or manufactured Offshore. 14  Farmshoring refers to outsourcing to USA rural-located companies. 15  Homeshoring also known as Homesourcing  is a form of IT-enabled transfer of service industry employment from offices to home-based ... with appropriate telephone and Internet facilities.. 16  17  These telecommuting positions may be customer-facing or back-office , 18  and the workers may be employees or independent contractors . An Intermediary is when a business provides a contract service to another organization while contracting out that same service. 19  20  Acronyms  edit  Some of the acronyms related to BPO  Business Process Outsourcing are EPO - Engineering Process Outsourcing ITO - Information Technology Outsourcing KPO - Knowledge process outsourcing LPO - Legal process outsourcing 21  RPO - Recruitment process outsourcing Overview  edit  Motivations  edit  Global labor arbitrage can provide major financial savings from lower international labor rates, which could be a major motivation for offshoring. Cost savings from economies of scale and specialization can also motivate outsourcing. Another motivation is speed to market to make this work, a new process was developed outsource the outsourcing process. 22  Details of managing DuPont s CIO Cinda Hallman s 4 billion 10-year outsourcing contract with Computer Sciences Corporation and Anderson Consulting were outsourced, thus avoiding inventing a process if wed done it in-house. A subsequently developed term to describe this is midsourcing . 23  24  25  Outsourcing can offer greater budget flexibility and control by allowing organizations to pay for the services and business functions they need, when they need them. It also reduces the need to hire and train specialized staff, makes available specialized expertise, and can reduce capital, operating expenses, 26  and risk. Do what you do best and outsource the rest has become an internationally recognized business tagline first coined and developed 27  in the 1990s by the legendary management consultant Peter Drucker . The slogan was primarily used to advocate outsourcing as a viable business strategy. Drucker began explaining the concept of Outsourcing as early as 1989 in his Wall Street Journal article entitled Sell the Mailroom. 28  Sometimes the effect of what looks like outsourcing from one side and insourcing from the other side can be unexpected The New York Times reported in 2001 that 6.4 million Americans .. worked for foreign companies as of 2001, but more jobs are being outsourced than the reverse. 29  Agreements  edit  Two organizations may enter into a contractual agreement involving an exchange of services , expertise, and payments . Outsourcing is said to help firms to perform well in their core competencies, fuel innovation, and mitigate a shortage of skill or expertise in the areas where they want to outsource. 30  History  edit  20th century  edit  Following the adding of management layers in the 1950s and 1960s to support expansion for the sake of economy of scale, corporations found that agility and added profits could be obtained by focusing on core strengths the 1970s and 1980s were the beginnings of what later was named outsourcing. 31  Kodak s 1989 outsourcing most of its information technology systems 32  was followed by others during the 1990s. 32  In 2013, the International Association of Outsourcing Professionals gave recognition to Electronic Data Systems Corporations Morton H. Meyerson 33  who, in 1967, proposed the business model that eventually became known as outsourcing. 34  IT-enabled services offshore outsourcing  edit  Growth of offshoring of IT-enabled services, both to subsidiaries and to outside companies offshore outsourcing is linked to the availability of large amounts of reliable and affordable communication infrastructure following the telecommunication and Internet expansion of the late 1990s. 35  Services making use of low-cost countries included back-office and administrative functions, such as finance and accounting, HR, and legal call centers and other customer-facing departments, such as marketing and sales services IT infrastructure and application development knowledge services, including engineering support, product design, research and development, and analytics. Early 21st century  edit  In the early 21st century, businesses increasingly outsourced to suppliers outside their own country, sometimes referred to as offshoring or offshore outsourcing . Other options subsequently emerged nearshoring , crowdsourcing , multisourcing , 36  37  strategic alliances  strategic partnerships , strategic outsourcing. 38  From Druckers perspective, a company should only seek to subcontract in those areas in which it demonstrated no special ability. 39  The business strategy outlined by his slogan recommended that companies should take advantage of a specialist providers knowledge and economies of scale to improve performance and achieve the service needed. 40  In 2009, by way of recognition, Peter Drucker posthumously received a significant honor when he was inducted into the Outsourcing Hall of Fame for his outstanding work in the field. 39  Limitations due to growth  edit  Inflation, high domestic interest rates, and economic growth pushed Indias IT salaries 10 - 15, making some jobs relatively too expensive, compared to other offshoring destinations. Areas for advancing within the value chain included research and development, equity analysis, tax-return processing, radiological analysis, and medical transcription . Offshore alternatives  edit  Japanese companies outsourced to China, particularly to formerly Japanese-occupied cities. 41  German companies have outsourced to Eastern European countries with German-language affiliation, such as Poland and Romania . 42  French companies outsource to North Africa for similar reasons. For Australian IT companies, Indonesia is one of the major choice of offshoring destination. Near-shore location, common time zone and adequate IT work force are the reasons for offshoring IT services to Indonesia. Growth of white-collar outsourcing  edit  Although offshoring initially focused on manufacturing, white-collar offshoringoutsourcing has grown rapidly since the early 21st century. The digital workforce of countries like India and China are only paid a fraction of what would be minimum wage in the US. On average, software engineers are getting paid between 250,000 and 1,500,000 rupees US4,000 to US23,000 in India as opposed to 40,000100,000 in countries such as the US and Canada . 43  Closer to the USA, Costa Rica has become a big source for the advantages of a highly educated labor force, a large bilingual population, stable democratic government, and similar time zones with the United States. It takes only a few hours to travel between Costa Rica and the US. Companies such as Intel, Procter  Gamble, HP, Gensler, Amazon and Bank of America have big operations in Costa Rica. 44  Unlike outsourced manufacturing, outsourced white collar workers can choose their working hours, and for which companies to work. Clients benefit from telecommuting , reduced office space, management salary, and employee benefits as these individuals are contracted workers . 45  However, ending a government oursourcing arrangement has its difficulties too. 46  Reasons for outsourcing  edit  While U.S. companies do not outsource to reduce high top level executive or managerial costs, 47  they primarily outsource to reduce peripheral and non-core business expenses. 48  Further reasons are higher taxes, high energy costs, and excessive government regulation or mandates. Mandated benefits like social security , Medicare , and safety protection  OSHA regulations are also motivators. 49  By contrast, executive pay in the United States in 2007, which could exceed 400 times more than average workers  a gap 20 times bigger than it was in 1965. 47  is not a factor. Other reasons include reducing and controlling operating costs, improving company focus, gaining access to world-class capabilities, freeing internal resources for other purposes, streamlining or increasing efficiency for time-consuming functions, and maximizing use of external resources. For small businesses, contractingsubcontractingoutsourcing might be done to improve work-life balance 50  Outsourcing models  edit  There are many outsourcing models, and theyve varied 51  by country, 52  year 53  54  and industry. 55  56  Another approach is to differentiate between tactical and strategic outsourcing models. Tactical models include staff augmentation project-based to gain expertise not available in-house. Strategic consultancy includes for Business process improvement . 57  Innovation outsourcing  edit  When offshore outsourcing knowledge work, firms heavily rely on the availability of technical personnel at offshore locations. One of the challenges in offshoring engineering innovation is a reduction in quality. 58  Co-sourcing  edit  Co-sourcing is a hybrid of internal staff supplemented by an external service provider. 59  60  Co-sourcing can minimize sourcing risks, increase transparency, clarity and lend toward better control than fully outsourced. 61  Co-sourcing services can supplement internal audit staff with specialized skills such as information risk management or integrity services, or help during peak periods, or similarly for other areas such as software development or human resources. Identity management co-sourcing  edit  Identity management co-sourcing is when on-site hardware 62  63  interacts with outside identity services. This contrasts with an all in-the-cloud service scenario, where the identity service is built, hosted and operated by the service provider in an externally hosted, cloud computing infrastructure. Offshore Software R D Co-sourcing  edit  Offshore Software R D is the provision of software development services by a supplier whether external or internal located in a different country from the one where the software will be used. The global software R D services market, as contrasted to Information Technology Outsourcing ITO and BPO , is rather young and currently is at a relatively early stage of development. 64  Countries involved in outsourced software R D  edit  Canada, India, Ireland, and Israel were the four leading countries as of 2003. 64  Although many countries have participated in the Offshore outsourcing of software development, their involvement in co-sourced and outsourced Research  Development R D was somewhat limited. Canada, the second largest by 2009, had 21 65  As of 2018, the top three were deemed by one research-based policy analysis and commentary from leading economists as China, India and Israel. 66  Gartner Group adds in Russia, but doesnt make it clear whether this is pure R D or run-of-the-mill IT outsourcing. 67  Usability issues in offshore development  edit  The main driver for offshoring development work has been the greater availability of developers at a lower cost than in the home country. However, the rise in offshore development has taken place in parallel with an increased awareness of the importance of usability, and the user experience, in software. Outsourced development poses special problems for development, i.e. the mo re formal, contractual relationship between the supplier and client, and geographical separation place greater distance between the developers and users, which makes it harder to reflect the users needs in the final product. This problem is exacerbated if the development is offshore. Further complications arise from cultural differences, which apply even if the development is carried out by an in-house offshore team. Historically offshore development concentrated on back office functions but, as offshoring has grown, a wider range of applications have been developed. Offshore suppliers have had to respond to the commercial pressures arising from usability issues by building up their usability expertise. Indeed, this problem has presented an attractive opportunity to some suppliers to move u p market and offer higher value services. 68  69  70  Legal issues  edit  Offshore Software R D means that company A turns over responsibility, in whole or in part, of an in-house software development to company B whose location is outside of company As national jurisdiction. Maximizing the economic value of an offshore software development asset critically depends on understanding how best to use the available forms of legal regulations to protect intellectual right s. If the vendor cannot be trusted to protect trade secrets, then the risks of an offshoring software development may outweigh its potential benefits. Hence, it is critical to review the intellectual property policy of the potential offshoring supplier. The intellectual property protection policy of an offshore software development company must be reflected in these crucial do cuments General Agreement Non-Disclosure Agreement Employee Confidentiality Contract. 71  2000-2012 R D  edit  As forecast in 2003, 72  R D is outsourced. Ownership of intellectual property by the outsourcing company, despite outside development, was the goal. To defend against tax-motivated cost-shifting, the US government passed regulations in 2006 to make outsourcing research harder. 73  Despite many R D contracts given to Indian universities and labs, only some research solutions were patented. 74  While Pfizer moved some of its R D from the UK to India, 75  a Forbes article suggested that it is increasingly more dangerous to offshore IP sensitive projects to India, because of Indias continued ignorance of patent regulations. 76  In turn, companies such as Pfizer and Novartis, have lost rights to sell many of their cancer medications in India because of lack of IP protection . Future trends  edit  A 2018 The Future of Outsourcing report began with The future of outsourcing is digital. 77  The Do what you do best and outsource the rest 27  approach means that integration with retained systems 77  is the new transition challenge - people training still exists, but is merely an also. There is more complexity than before, especially when the outside company may be an integrator. 77  While the number of technically skilled labor grows in India, Indian offshore companies are increasingly tapping into the skilled labor already available in Eastern Europe to better address the needs of the Western European R D market. 78  Changed government outsourcing focus  edit  Forbes considers the USA 2016 election the most disruptive change agent for the outsourcing industry, 79  especially renewed invest in America goals. Furthermore, there are growing legally required data protections, whose obligations and implementation details must be understood by both sides. 77  80  This includes dealing with customer rights. 81  Implications  edit  Performance measurement  edit  Focusing on software quality metrics is a good way to maintain track of how well a project is performing. Management processes  edit  Globalization and complex supply chains , along with greater physical distance between higher management and the production-floor employees often requires a change in management methodologies, as inspection and feedback may not be as direct and frequent as in internal processes. This often requires the assimilation of new communication methods such as voice over IP , instant messaging , and Issue tracking systems, new time management methods such as time tracking software , and new cost- and schedule-assessment tools such as cost estimation software .  citation needed  The term Transition methodology 82  83  Communications and customer service  edit  In the area of call center outsourcing, especially when combined with offshoring, 84  agents may speak with different linguistic features such as accents , word use and phraseology, which may impede comprehension. 85  86  87  88  Governance  edit  In 1979, Nobel laureate Oliver E. Williamson wrote that the governance structure is the framework within which the integrity of a transaction is decided. Adding further that because contracts are varied and complex, governance structures vary with the nature of the transaction. 89  University of Tennessee researchers have been studying complex outsourcing relationships since 2003. Emerging thinking regarding strategic outsourcing is focusing on creating a contract structure in which the parties have a vested interest in managing what are often highly complex business arrangements in a more collaborative, aligned, exible, and credible way. 90  91  Security  edit  Reduced security, sometimes related to lower loyalty 92  may occur, even when outsourced staff change their legal status but not their desk. While security and compliance issues are supposed to be addressed through the contract between the client and the suppliers, fraud cases have been reported. In April 2005, a high-profile case involved the theft of 350,000 from four Citibank customers when call-center workers acquired the passwords to customer accounts and transferred the money to their own accounts opened under fictitious names. Citibank did not find out about the problem until the American customers noticed discrepancies with their accounts and notified the bank. 93  Information Technology  edit  Richard Baldwin s 2006 The Great Unbundling work was followed in 2012 by Globalizations Second Acceleration the Second Unbundling and in 2016 by The Great Convergence Information Technology and the New Globalization . 94  It is here, rather than in manufacturing, that the bits economy can advance in ways that the economy of atoms and things cant an early 1990s Newsweek had a half page cartoon showing someone who had just ordered a pizza online, and was seeking help to download it. Issues and reversals  edit  Demonstrating need to ensure outsourcing gains are realised and losses avoided at a summit in London in 2009 A number of outsourcings and offshorings that were deemed failures 95  96  58  led to reversals 97  98  signaled by use of terms such as Insourcing and reshoring . The New York Times reported in 2017 that IBM plans to hire 25,000 more workers in the United States over the next four years, overlapping India-based Infosys s 10,000 workers in the United States over the next two years. 99  A clue to a tipping point having been reached was a short essay titled Maybe You Shouldnt Outsource Everything After All 100  and the longer That Job Sent to India May Now Go to Indiana. Among problems encountered were supply-and-demand induced raises in salaries and lost benefits of similar-time-zone. Other issues were differences in language and culture. 99  86  Another reason for a decrease in outsourcing is that many jobs that were subcontracted abroad have been replaced by technological advances. 101  According to a 2005 Deloitte Consulting survey, a quarter of the companies which had outsourced tasks reversed their strategy. 101  These reversals, however, didnt undo the damage. New factories often were in different locations needed different skill sets used more automation 102  Public opinion in the US and other Western powers opposing outsourcing was particularly strengthened by the drastic increase in unemployment as a result of the 20072008 financial crisis. From 2000 to 2010, the US experienced a net loss of 687,000 jobs due to outsourcing, primarily in the computers and electronics sector. Public disenchantment with outsourcing has not only stir red political responses, as seen in the 2012 US presidential campaigns , but it has also made companies more reluctant to outsource or offshore jobs. 101  A counterswing depicted by a 2016 Deloitte survey suggested that companies are no longer reluctant to outsource. 103  Deloittes survey identified three trends Companies are broadening their approach to outsourcing as they begin to view it as more than a simple cost-cutting play Organizations are redefining the ways they enter into outsourcing relationships and manage the ensuing risks. Organizations are changing the way they are managing their relationships with outsourcing providers to maximize the value of those relationships. Insourcing  edit  Insourcing is the process of reversing an outsourcing, possibly using help from those not currently part of the inhouse staff. 104  105  106  Outsourcing has gone through many iterations and reinventions, and some outsourcing contracts have been partially or fully reversed. Often the reason is to maintain control of critical production or competencies, and insourcing is used to reduce costs of taxes, labor and transportation. 107  Regional insourcing , a related term, is when a company assigns work to a subsidiary that is within the same country. This differs from onshoring and reshoring  these may be either inside or outside the company. Regional insourcing  edit  Regional insourcing is a process in which a company establishes satellite locations for specific entities of their business, making use of advantages one state may have over another 108  109  This concept focuses on the delegating or reassigning of procedures, functions, or jobs from production within a business in one location to another internal entity that specializes in that operation. This allows companies to streamline production, boost competency, and increase their bottom line. This competitive strategy applies the classical argument of Adam Smith , which posits that two nations would benefit more from one another by trading the goods that they are more proficient at manufacturing. 110  111  Net effect on jobs  edit  To those who are concerned that nations may be losing a net number of jobs due to outsourcing, some 112  point out that insourcing also occurs. A 2004 study 113  in the United States, the United Kingdom, and many other industrialized countries more jobs are insourced than outsourced. The New York Times disagreed, and wrote that free trade with low-wage countries is win-lose for many employees who find their jobs offshored or with stagnating wages. 114  The impact of offshore outsourcing, according to two estimates published by The Economist showed unequal effect during the period studied 2004 to 2015, ranging from 150,000 to as high as 300,000 jobs lost per year. 115  In 2010, a group of manufacturers started the Reshoring Initiative, focusing on bringing manufacturing jobs for American companies back to the country. 116  Their data indicated that 140,000 American jobs were lost in 2003 due to offshoring. Eleven years later in 2014, the United States recovered 10,000 of those offshored positions this marked the highest net gain in 20 years. 117  More than 90 of the jobs that American companies offshored and outsourced manufacturing to low cost countries such as China , Malaysia and Vietnam did not return. 116  117  Insourcing crossbreeds  edit  The fluctuation of prefixes and names give rise to many more cross-breeds of insourcing. For example, offshore insourcing is when companies set up their own  captive  process centers overseas, sometimes called a Captive Service, 118  taking advantage of their cheaper surroundings while maintaining control of their back-office work and business processes. 119   Remote insourcing  refers to hiring developers to work in-house from virtual remote facilities. 120  In the United States  edit  A 2012 series of articles in Atlantic Magazine 121  122  123  124  highlighted a turning of the tide for parts of the USAs manufacturing industry. Specific causes identified include rising third-world wages, recognition of hidden off-shoring costs, innovations in designmanufactureassemblytime-to-market, increasing fuel and transportation costs, falling energy costs in the US, increasing US labor productivity, and union flexibility. Hiring at GEs giant Appliance Park in Louisville increased 90 during 2012. Standpoint of labor  edit  From the standpoint of labor, outsourcing may represent a new threat, contributing to worker insecurity, and is reflective of the general process of globalization and economic polarization . 125  On June 26, 2009, Jeff Immelt , the CEO of General Electric , called for the United States to increase its manufacturing base employment to 20 of the workforce, commenting that the U.S. has outsourced too much and can no longer rely on consumer spending to drive demand. 126  Standpoint of government  edit  Western governments may attempt to compensate workers affected by outsourcing through various forms of legislation. In Europe, the Acquired Rights Directive attempts to address the issue. The Directive is implemented differently in different nations. In the United States, the Trade Adjustment Assistance Act is meant to provide compensation for workers directly affected by international trade agreements. Whether or not these policies provide the security and fair compensation they promise is debatable. Government response  edit  In response to the recession, President Obama launched the SelectUSA program in 2011. In January 2012, President Obama Issued a Call to Action to Invest in America at the White House Insourcing American Jobs Forum. 127  Obama met with representatives of companies such as Otis Elevator , Apple , DuPont , Master Lock , all of which had recently brought jobs back or made significant investments in the United States. Policy-making strategy  edit  A main feature of outsourcing influencing policy-making is the unpredictability it generates regarding the future of any particular sector or skill-group. The uncertainty of future conditions influences governance approaches to different aspects of long-term policies. In particular, distinction is needed between cyclical unemployment  for which pump it up solutions have worked in the past, and structural unemployment  when businesses and industries that employed them no longer exist, and their skills no longer have the value they once did. 102  Competitiveness  edit  A governance that attempts adapting to the changing environment will facilitate growth and a stable transition to new economic structures 128  until the economic structures become detrimental to the social, political and cultural structures. Automation increases output and allows for reduced cost per item. When these changes are not well synronized, unemployment or underemployment is a likely result. When transportation costs remain unchanged, the negative effect may be permanent 102  jobs in protected sectors may no longer exist. 129  USA outsourcings effect on Mexico, studies suggest, is that for every 10 increase in US wages, north Mexico cities along the border experienced wage rises of 2.5, about 0.69 higher than in inner cities. 130  By contrast, higher rates of saving and investment in Asian countries, along with rising levels of education, studies suggest, fueled the Asian miracle rather than improvements in productivity and industrial efficiency. There was also an increase in patenting and research and development expenditures. 131  Industrial policy  edit  Outsourcing results from an internationalization of labor markets as more tasks become tradable. According to leading economist Greg Mankiw, the labour market functions under the same forces as the market of goods, with the underlying implication that the greater the number of tasks available to being moved, the better for efficiency under the gains from trade. With technologic al progress, more tasks can be offshored at different stages of the overall corporate process. 14  The tradeoffs are not always balanced, and a 2004 viewer of the situation said the total number of jobs realized in the United States from insourcing is far less than those lost through outsourcing. 132  Environmental policy  edit  Import competition has caused a de facto race-to-the-bottom where countries lower environmental regulations to secure a competitive edge for their industries relative to other countries. As Mexico competes with China over Canadian and American markets, its national Commission for Environmental Cooperation has not been active in enacting or enforcing regulations to prevent environmental damage from increasingly industrialized Export Processing Zones. Similarly, since the signing of NAFTA, heavy industries have increasingly moved to the US which has a comparative advantage due to its abundant presence of capital and well-developed technology. A further example of environmental de-regulation with the objective of protecting trade incentives have been the numerous exemptions to carbon taxes in European countries during the 1990s. Although outsourcing can influence environmental de-regulatory trends, the added cost of preventing pollution does not majorly determine trade flows or industrialization. 133  Success stories  edit  Companies such as ET Water Systems , GE Appliances and Caterpillar found that with the increase of labor costs in Japan and China, the cost of shipping and custom fees, it cost only about 10 more to manufacture in America. 101  Advances in technology and automation such as 3D printing technologies 134  have made bringing manufacturing back to the United States both cost effective and possible. Adidas , for example, plans producing highly customized shoes with 3D printers in the U.S. 135  Globalization and socio-economic implications  edit  Main article Globalization Industrialization  edit  Outsourcing has contributed to further levelling of global inequalities as it has led to general trends of industrialization in the Global South and deindustrialization in the Global North. Not all manufacturing should return to the U.S. 136  The rise of the middle class in China, India and other countries has created markets for the products made in those countries. Just as the U.S. has a Made in U.S.A. program, other countries support products made in their countries as well. Localization, the process of manufacturing products for the local market, is an approach to keeping some manufacturing offshore and brin ging some of it back. Besides the cost savings of manufacturing closer to the market, the lead time for adapting to changes in the market is faster. The rise in industrial efficiency which characterized development in developed countries has occurred as a result of labor-saving technological improvements. Although these improvements do not directly reduce employment levels but rather increase output per unit of work, they can indirectly diminish the amount of labor required for fixed levels of output. 137  Growth and income  edit  It has been suggested that workers require more education and different skills, working with software rather than drill presses 102  rather than rely on limited growth labor requirements for non-tradable services. By location  edit  United States  edit  Protection of some data involved in outsourcing, such as about patients  HIPAA  is one of the few federal protections. 138  Outsourcing is a continuing political issue in the United States, having been conflated with offshoring during the 2004 U.S. presidential election . The political debate centered on outsourcings consequences for the domestic U.S. workforce. Democratic U.S. presidential candidate John Kerry called U.S. firms that outsource jobs abroad or that incorporate overseas in tax havens to avoid paying their fair share of U.S. taxes  Benedict Arnold corporations. A Zogby International August 2004 poll found that 71 of American voters believed outsourcing jobs overseas hurt the economy while another 62 believed that the U.S. government should impose some legislative action against these companies, possibly in the form of increased taxes. 139  140  President Obama promoted the  Bring Jobs Home Act  to help reshore jobs by using tax cuts and credits for moving operations back to the USA. 141  The same bill was reintroduced in the 113th United States Congress as the Bring Jobs Home Act S. 2569 113th Congress . 142  143  While labor advocates claim union busting as one possible cause of outsourcing, 144  another claim is high corporate income tax rate in the U.S. relative to other OECD nations, 145  146   needs update  and the practice of taxing revenues earned outside of U.S. jurisdiction, a very uncommon practice. Some counterclaim that the actual taxes paid by US corporations may be considerably lower than official rates due to the use of tax loopholes, tax havens, and gaming the system. 147  Sarbanes-Oxley has also been cited as a factor. See also Disney litigation Europe  edit  In Europe, nearshore outsourcing nearsourcing relationships are between clients in larger European economies and various providers in smaller European nations. Major centers are Czech Republic , Hungary , Portugal , Poland , Slovakia , Romania , Bulgaria , Belarus and the Baltic . 148  There are others in larger markets, such as Russia and Ukraine . The attraction is lower-cost skilled labor forces, and a less stringent regulatory environment, but crucially they allow for more day to day physical oversight. They also have strong cultural ties to the major economic centers in Europe. 149  For example, Bulgaria is now considered to be a viable outsourcing destination for such companies as German software company SAP , where labor costs are low, and the skills available, but which is also closer to home. 150  In 2009, the Central-Eastern European Outsourcing Association CEEOA published research estimating that the Eastern European region has over 95,000 IT specialists involved in the industry, working for close to 5000 companies. 151  European Union  edit  Council Directive 77187 of 14 February 1977 protects employees rights in the event of transfers of undertakings, businesses or parts of businesses as amended 29 June 1998, Directive 9850EC  12 March 2001s Directive 200123. Rights acquired by employees with the former employer are to be safeguarded when they, together with the undertaking in which they are employed, are transferred to another employer, i.e., the contractor. Case subsequent to the European Court of Justices Christel Schmidt v. Spar- und Leihkasse der frheren mter Bordesholm, Kiel und Cronshagen, Case C-39292 1994 have disputed whether a particular contracting-out exercise constituted a transfer of an undertaking see, for example, Ayse Szen v. Zehnacker Gebudereinigung GmbH Krankenhausservice , Case C-1395 1997. In principle, employees may benefit from the protection offered by the directive. Many Western European firms have been transferring tech projects eastward. Deutsche Bank has some of its software developed in Ukraine, 152  Siemens possesses an R D center in Romania. The outsourcing services market continued to flourish in Central and Eastern European during 20072009. In Poland alone, during 2009, despite a global economic downturn, approximately 10,000 jobs were created in business process outsourcing BPO. 153  154  Labor issues in Japan  edit  Article 44 of Japans Employment Security Act implicitly bans the domesticforeign workers supplied by unauthorized companies regardless of their operating locations. The law will apply if at least one party of suppliers, clients, labors reside in Japan, and if the labors are the integral part of the chain of command by the client company, or the supplier. No person shall carry out a labor supply business or have workers supplied by a person who carries out a labor supply business work under hisher own directions or orders, except in cases provided for in the following Article. A person who falls under any of the following items shall be punished by imprisonment with work for not more than one year or a fine of not more than one million yen. Article 64 Unless permitted by act, no person shall obtain profit by intervening, as a business, in the employment of another. 155  Victims can lodge a criminal complaint against the CEO of the suppliers and clients. The CEO risks arrest, and the Japanese company may face a private settlement with financial package in the range between 20 and 100 million JPY 200,000 - million USD. China  edit  A China-based company, Lenovo , outsourcedreshored manufacturing of some time-critical customized PCs to the U.S. since If it made them in China they would spend six weeks on a ship. 101  Asia  edit  Countries that have been the focus of outsourcing include India, 156  and the Philippines for American and European companies, and China and Vietnam for Japanese companies. The Asian IT service market is still in its infancy, but in 2008 industry think tank Nasscom-McKinsey predicted a 17 billion IT service industry in India alone. 157  Defining Near  edit  When the New York Times headlined Near Source of Supplies the Best Policy 158  their main focus was on cost of production. Although transportation cost was addressed, they did not choose among transporting supplies to place of production 159  transporting finished goods to places of sale cost and availability of labor Nearshoring vs. Nearsourcing The former refers to employees. Both refer to out-of-country but relatively nearby locations. 160  161  Nearshoring  edit  Nearshoring is having business processes , especially information technology processes, in a nearby country, often sharing a border with the target country. 162  Commonalities usually include geographic, temporal time zone, cultural, social, linguistic, economic, political, or historical linkages. 163  Nearsourcing  edit  There are two very different usages of this term The hybrid term nearshore outsourcing is sometimes used as an alternative for nearsourcing , 164  since nearsourcing workers are not employees of the company for which the work is performed. It can also be a reversal, by contracting with a development partner in a different country but in close proximity same or nearby time zone, facilitating communication and allowing frequent visits. 165  Near-sourcing also known as near-sourced or near-source , 166  is a business strategically placing some or all of its operations close to where its products are sold. Typically, this is contrasted with the trend to outsource low-wage manufacturing operations to developing nations  offshoring , and reflects a reversal of that trend. Businesses can near-source manufacturing, to customer service 167  and IT services. It is a form of outsourcing, in that the work is done by an outside contracted company rather than internally  insourcing , but unlike offshore outsourcing, the work is done in fairly close proximity to either the company headquarters or its target market. Reasons to near-source  edit  Culture  edit  Cultural alignment with the business is often more readily achieved through near-sourcing due to there being similarities between the cultures in which the business is located and in which services are sub-contracted, including for example proficiency with the language used in that culture. Communication  edit  Communication on business projects between management and the project team is often of particular concern. Constraints imposed by time zones can make communication a labor intense process, so near-sourcing provides a solution for facilitating the communication process through eliminating or reducing time zone constraints. Proximity also facilitates communication by allowing var ious actors within the business to meet on a regular basis when required. Traveling from the United States to Canada only takes a few hours depending on the location, but traveling to China or Europe often entails a much longer flight time. Overview  edit  Nearshoring is a derivative of the business term offshoring . In the USA, American clients nearshore to Canada 162  and Mexico , 168  169  or both, 170  as well as to many nations in Central and South America. Software development nearshoring is mainly due to available low cost skilled developers. 171  The nearshoring of call centers, shared services centers, and  Business Process Outsourcing  rose as offshore outsourcing was seen to be relatively less valuable. 172  The complexities of offshoring stem from language and cultural differences, travel distances, workdaytime zone mismatches, and greater effort for needed for establishing trust and long-term relationships. Many nearshore providers attempted to circumvent communication and project management barriers by developing new ways to align organizations. As a result, concepts such as remote insourcing were created to give clients more control in managing their own projects. Nearshoring still hasnt overcome all barriers, but proximity allows more flexibility to align organizations. 168  English language skills are the cornerstone of Nearshore BPO and IT services. Collaboration by universities, industry, and government has slowly produced improvements. 173  Visa requirements  edit  Main article H-1B visa The United States has a special visa , the H-1B , 174  which enables American companies to temporarily up to three years, or by extension, six hire foreign workers to supplement their employees or replace those holding existing positions. In hearings on this matter, a United States senator called these their outsourcing visa. 175  Examples  edit  In 2003 Procter  Gamble outsourced their facilities management support, but it did not involve offshoring. 176  Dell offshored to India in 2001 but reversed since customers were not happy with the prior arrangement ... 11  Print and mail outsourcing  edit  Print and mail outsourcing is the outsourcing of document printing and distribution. The Print Services  Distribution Association was formed in 1946, and its members provide services that today might involve the word outsource. Similarly, members of the Direct Mail Marketing Association were the outsourcers for advertising agencies and others doing mailings. DMMA celebrated their 100th anniversary in 2017. The term outsourcing became very common in the print and mail business during the 1990s, and later expanded to be very broad and inclusive of most any process by the year 2000. Today, there are web based print to mail solutions for small to mid-size companies which allow the user to send one to thousands of documents into the mail stream, directly from a desktop or web interf ace. 177  Marketing outsourcing  edit  The term outsource marketing has been used in Britain to mean the outsourcing of the marketing function. 178  The motivation for this has been cost reduction . 179  180  specialized expertise. 181  speed of execution short term staff augmentation 182  While much of this work is the bread and butter of specialized departments within advertising agencies, sometimes specialist are used, such as when the Guardian newspaper outsourced most of their marketing design in May 2010. 183  Business process outsourcing  edit  Business process outsourcing  BPO  is a subset of outsourcing that involves the contracting of the operations and responsibilities of a specific business process to a third-party service provider . Originally, this was associated with manufacturing firms, such as Coca-Cola that outsourced large segments of its supply chain . 184  BPO is typically categorized into back office and front office outsourcing. 185  BPO can be offshore outsourcing or to a neighbouring or nearby country nearsourcing nearshore outsourcing. Information Technology Enabled Service ITES-BPO, 186  Knowledge process outsourcing KPO and Legal process outsourcing LPO are some of the sub-segments of BPO. Although BPO began as a cost-reducer, changes specifically the move to more service-based rather than product-based contracts, companies now choose to outsource their back-office increasingly for time flexibility and direct quality control. 187  Business process outsourcing enhances the flexibility of an organization in different ways BPO vendor charges are project-based or fee-for-service, using business models such as Remote In-Sourcing or similar software development and outsourcing models. 188  189  This can help a company to become more flexible by transforming fixed into variable costs . 190  A variable cost structure helps a company responding to changes in required capacity and does not require a company to invest in assets, thereby making the company more flexible. 191  BPO also permits focusing on a companys core competencies . 192  Supply chain management with effective use of supply chain partners and business process outsourcing can increase the speed of several business processes. 193  BPO caveats  edit  Even various contractual compensation strategies may leave the company as having a new single point of failure where even an after the fact payment is not enough to offset complete failure of the customers business. 194  Unclear contractual issues are not the only risks theres also changing requirements and unforeseen charges, failure to meet service levels, and a dependence on the BPO which reduces flexibility. The latter is called lock-in  flexibility may be lost due to penalty clauses and other contract terms. 195  Also, the selection criteria may seem vague and undifferentiated 196  Security risks can arise regarding both from physical communication and from a privacy perspective. Employee attitude may change, and the company risks losing independence. 197  198  Risks and threats of outsourcing must therefore be managed, to achieve any benefits. In order to manage outsourcing in a structured way, maximising positive outcome, minimising risks and avoiding any threats, a business continuity management BCM model is set up. BCM consists of a set of steps, to successfully identify, manage and control the business processes that are, or can be outsourced. 199  Analytical hierarchy process AHP is a framework of BPO focused on identifying potential outsourceable information systems. 200  L. Willcocks, M. Lacity and G. Fitzgerald identify several contracting problems companies face, ranging from unclear contract formatting, to a lack of understanding of technical IT processes. 201  Technological pressures  edit  Industry analysts have identified robotic process automation RPA software and in particular the enhanced self-guided RPAAI based on artificial intelligence as a potential threat to the industry 202  203  and speculate as to the likely long term impact. 204  In the short term, however, there is likely to be little impact as existing contracts run their course it is only reasonable to expect demand for cost efficiency and innovation to result in transformative changes at the point of contract renewals. With the average length of a BPO contract being 5 years or more 205   and many contracts being longer  this hypothesis will take some time to play out. On the other hand, an academic study 206  by the London School of Economics was at pains to counter the so-called myth that RPA will bring back many jobs from offshore . One possible argument behind such an assertion is that new technology provides new opportunities for increased quality, reliability, scalability and cost control, thus enabling BPO providers to increasingly compete on an outcomes-based model rather than competing on cost alone. With the core offering potentially changing from a lift and shift approach based on fixed costs t o a more qualitative, service based and outcomes-based model, there is perhaps a new opportunity to grow the BPO industry with a new offering. Industry size  edit  One estimate of the worldwide BPO market from the BPO Services Global Industry Almanac 2017, puts the size of the industry in 2016 at about US140 billion. 207  India, China and the Philippines are major powerhouses in the industry. In 2017, in India, the BPO industry generated US30 billion in revenue according to the national industry association. 208  The BPO industry is a small segment of the total outsourcing industry in India. The BPO industry workforce in India is expected to shrink by 14 in 2021.  citation needed  The BPO industry and IT services industry in combination are worth a total of US154 billion in revenue in 2017. 209  The BPO industry in the Philippines generated 22.9 billion in revenues in 2016, 210  while around 700 thousand medium and high skill jobs would be created by 2022.  citation needed  In 2015, official statistics put the size of the total outsourcing industry in China, including not only the BPO industry but also IT outsourcing services, at 130.9 billion. 211  See also  edit  A. Aneesh Algoracy Banking BPO services BPO security Business process outsourcing to India Business process outsourcing in the Philippines Business process outsourcing in China Call center industry in the Philippines Call center industry in Bangladesh Contingent workforce Crowdsourcing Facilities management Freelance marketplace Globality Global sourcing Globalization Globally Integrated Enterprise Offshoring Research Network Outsourced document processing Professional Employer Organization Programmers Guild Recruitment Selfsourcing Software testing outsourcing Supply chain Telecentre Telecommuting Virtual assistance References  edit   Oursourcing . Britannica.com . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Ian McCarthy Angela Anagnostou 2004. The impact of outsourcing on the transaction costs and boundaries of manufacturing. International Journal of Production Economics . 88 1 6171. CiteSeerX   10.1.1.468.9139 . doi  10.1016s0925-52730300183-x .  Stuart Rosenberg 2018. The Global Supply Chain and Risk Management . ISBN   1631579592 .  Outsource 1979, outsourcing 1981 Organizing Identity, Persons and Organizations After Theory . CTI Reviews. 2016. ISBN   1497042151 .  OED  Adrian Victor Alexandru Dumitru Bodislav. Outsourcing. The Concept PDF .  Jamieson, Dave, Public Interest Group Challenges Privatization Of Local, State Government Services Archived 2013-12-11 at the Wayback Machine , The Huffington Post, July 1, 2013. Retrieved 2013-07-01.  Judge Rebukes Government for Outsourcing Internal Investigation of LIBOR rigging . June 28, 2019.  Hira, Ron, and Anil Hira. Outsourcing America Whats behind Our National Crisis and How We Can Reclaim American Jobs. New York AMACOM, 2008. Print  67-96.  Davies, Paul. Whats This India Business Offshoring, Outsourcing, and the Global Services Revolution . London Nicholas Brealey International, 2004. Print.  a b Elizabeth Corcoran April 28, 2004. Dell moves outsourced jobs back to U.S. shores . Retrieved 2019-05-14 . customers were not happy with ...  Offshore insurers creating concerns among regulators . The New York Times . October 19, 1992.  Cliff Justice Stan Lepeak. Captive Audience How to Partner with Service Providers to Improve In-House Offshore Operations . CIO magazine . a.k.a. internal shared-services centers in low-cost locations  a b N. G. Mankiw P. Swagel 2006. The Politics and Economics of Offshore Outsourcing PDF . Harvard.edu drafted 2005, published 2006 working paper for the American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy .  also called domestic outsourcing. Domestic Inshoring and Farmshoring .  New words . Macmillan English Dictionary . Retrieved 2007-10-05 .  Not to be confused with Small officehome office .  Kevin G. Hall December 5, 2006. Homeshoring Grows Companies Cut Costs by Shipping Jobs to Workers Homes . Knight Ridder . Archived from the original on October 20, 2007. Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   Delegated authority Outsourcing in the general insurance market PDF . June 29, 2015.  Binder and other intermediary agreements . April 5, 2012.  Also called Legal outsourcing  Abbie Lundberg April 1, 1997. Outsourcing Letter from the editor. CIO . p.  12.  Messaging and Collaboration . InfoWorld . February 21, 2000. p.  14. ... will offer .. through .. midsourcing model  Harold F. Tipton Micki Krause 2003. Information Security Management Handbook, Fifth Edition . ISBN   978-0-8493-1997-6 . The term midsourcing refers to ...  The term Midsourcing subsequently became known as contracting a local or regional manufacturing service provider to arrange for the outsourced tasks. Your Source for Commercial Manufacturing Services . October 10, 2017.  B. Olive 2004. Outsourcing Growing, Despite Controversy. Power  1484, 1920.  a b Marian Haus 2011. Best 10 Peter Drucker quotes . pmseed . pmseed. Archived from the original on April 16, 2015 . Retrieved 26 April 2015 .  Drucker Peter F, 1989 Sell the Mailroom, Wall Street Journal , accessible at Archived copy . Archived from the original on 2015-05-22 . Retrieved 2015-04-27 . CS1 maint archived copy as title  link   Ken Belson April 11, 2004. Outsourcing, Turned Inside Out .  Overby, S 2007 ABC An Introduction to Outsourcing Archived 2007-06-30 at the Wayback Machine . CIO.com.  A Brief History of Outsourcing .  a b Outsourcing emerged as a new business strategy in early 1980s . September 20, 2010.  EDSs founder named it for Mort Meyerson  IAOP Announces Outsourcing Hall of Fame Inductees . IAOP.org The International Association of Outsourcing Professionals . January 8, 2013.  Mostafa Hashem Sherif 2006. Managing Projects in Telecommunication Services . ISBN   0470047674 . chapter COMMUNICATION AND OUTSOURCING ... Roche, 1998  Q4 2006 Mandatory Multisourcing Discipline Archived 2007-09-28 at the Wayback Machine Business Trends Quarterly  2006 Mandatory Multisourcing Discipline Archived 2007-11-19 at the Wayback Machine  see Holcomb  Hitt, 2007 and Vested outsourcing  a b Rick Wartzman February 5, 2010. The Drucker Difference Insourcing and Outsourcing the Right Mix . Bloomberg Business . Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on May 22, 2015 . Retrieved May 6, 2015 .  Gwynne Richards 2014. Warehouse Management A Complete Guide To Improving Efficiency and Minimizing Costs In the Modern Warehouse Second ed.. Walnut Street Suite 1100 Philadelphia PA 19102 Kogan Page Limited. p.  316. ISBN   978-0-7494-6934-4 . Archived from the original on September 24, 2015 . Retrieved May 6, 2015 .  discussed in the book The World is Flat .  Stephan Manning Jrg Sydow Arnold Windeler 2012. Securing Access to Lower-cost Talent Globally The Dynamics of Active Embedding and Field Structuration. Regional Studies . 46 9 12011218. doi  10.108000343404.2011.571243 .  Gillis, A. 2001, Digital sweatshops. This, 34, 6-6.  Barrett J. Brunsman April 3, 2018. Former P G manager elected president of Costa Rica . Cincinnati Business Courier .  Ross, J Irani, L Silberman, M.S. Zaldivar, A Tomlinson, B 2010. Who are the Crowdworkers Shifting Demographics in Mechanical Turk. CHI 2010.  Kate M. Manuel Jack Maskell May 5, 2011. Insourcing Functions Performed by Federal Contractors An Overview of the Legal Issues PDF . The Washington Post .  a b Albert R. Hunt February 18, 2007. Letter From Washington As U.S. rich-poor gap grows, so does public outcry  Americas  International Herald Tribune . The New York Times .  Forey, Gail, and Jane Lockwood. Globalization, Communication and the Workplace Talking across the World. New York Continuum, 2011. Electronic Book 21-26.  Buchholz, Todd G. Bringing the Jobs Home How the Left Created the Outsourcing Crisis   and How We Can Fix It. New York Sentinel, 2004. Print 97-118.  Ellen Gamerman June 2, 2007. Outsourcing Your Life . Wall Street Journal WSJ . Retrieved October 10, 2018 .  Define Outsourcing Models 5 Forms of Business Process Outsourcing . January 29, 2015.  Britains outsourcing model, copied around the world, is in trouble . The Economist . June 28, 2018.  Vested A Business Model for 21st Century Outsourcing . May 29, 2012.  Vested outsourcing  Outsourcing model redesign . ADLittle  Arthur D. Little  .  Nicholas Sinclair August 21, 2014. Models of Outsourcing . The Outsourced Accountant . Archived from the original on June 27, 2018 . Retrieved February 19, 2019 .  Serhiy Haziyev Halyna Semenova June 4, 2015. Outsourcing Engagement Models . Network World . IDG. Archived from the original on May 19, 2018 . Retrieved February 19, 2019 .  a b Nils Brede Moe Darja mite Geir Kjetil Hanssen Hamish Barney 2013-08-29. From offshore outsourcing to insourcing and partnerships four failed outsourcing attempts. Empirical Software Engineering . 19 5 12251258. doi  10.1007s10664-013-9272-x . ISSN   1382-3256 .  Andrew R. McIlvaine March 16, 2008.   Co-Sourcing and More . hreonline.com. Archived from the original on May 13, 2013 . Retrieved May 23, 2012 .  Diane Rezendes Khirallah September 2, 2002. Out With Outsourcing And In With Co-Sourcing   . informationweek .com . Retrieved May 23, 2012 .  Business Dictionary Archived copy . Archived from the original on 2016-08-19 . Retrieved 2016-08-18 . CS1 maint archived copy as title  link   68 success secrets . microsoft.com.  extending messaging to enterprise collaboration PDF . IBM.com.  a b Globalisation shakes the world . January 21, 2007 . Retrieved April 10, 2019  via news.bbc.co.uk.  UN Information Economy Report 2010 . p.  49.  Lee Branstetter Britta Glennon J. Bradford Jensen August 21, 2018. The IT revolution and the globalisation of R D .  Offshore Outsourcing Why Russia . Retrieved April 10, 2019 .  Usability Issues in Offshore Development an Indian Perspective , accessed January 8, 2013  What Happens to Usability when Development goes Offshore , accessed January 8, 2013  Offshore Development Culture and User Experience , accessed January 8, 2013  How to protect intellectual property and confidential information dealing with offshore software development company httpsbelitsoft.comoffshore-software-development-companyprotect-intellectual-property-and-confidential-information  R D the Latest Target of Silicon Valley Outsourcing - InternetNews . internetnews.com . Retrieved April 10, 2019 .  US tightens grip on Indian R D centres . Rediff . Retrieved April 10, 2019 .  Sujata Dutta Sachdeva December 3, 2006. Desi scientists help MNCs with R D solutions . Retrieved April 10, 2019  via The Economic Times.  Nirmalya Kumar Phanish Puranam 2011. India Inside The Emerging Innovation Challenge to the West . ISBN   142214240X .  Its time to stop Outsourcing Pharma R D to India . October 2012.  a b c d Rebecca S. Eisner Daniel A. Masur Brad L. Peterson 2018. The Future of Outsourcing PDF . Retrieved 2019-04-17 .  Indian BPOs Dial Eastern Europe. Jun 2009. httparticles.economictimes.indiatimes.com2009-06-12news27663963_1_indian-bpo-outsourcing-market-india-s-bpo  Anna Frazzetto March 21, 2018. Outsourcing In The New Normal Three Trends Reshaping The Global Industry . Forbes . Retrieved 2019-04-17 .  e.g. NYS-mandated cybersecurity standards affecting all institutions authorized ... to operate in New York...  South Korea requires giving digital service even when the user refuses to give permission for data or functions that are not necessary to the provision of the service.  Transition Methodology describes the process of migrating knowledge, systems, and operating capabilities between the two sides.  HP Business Process Outsourcing transition management PDF .  Nadeem, S 2009 Macaulays Cyber Children The Cultural Politics of Outsourcing in India Archived 2010-06-20 at the Wayback Machine . Cultural Sociology.  Alster, N 2005 Customer Disservice. Archived 2007-07-02 at the Wayback Machine www.CFO.com.  a b The words 100 U.S.Based Customer Service followed by Talk to a real person any time are on the back of envelopes mailed by a major USA corporation.  Discover cards 100 U.S. Based Customer Service . March 18, 2019.  Dis... Retrieved March 29, 2019 .  Williamson, Oliver E. 1979 Transaction-Cost Economics The Governance of Contractual Relations, Journal of Law and Economics Vol. 22 No. 2, Article 3accessible at Archived copy . Archived from the original on 2016-09-19 . Retrieved 2016-08-16 . CS1 maint archived copy as title  link   Kate Vitasek 2011. The Vested Outsourcing Manual first ed.. New York Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN   978-0-230-11268-1 .  Also see relational contract  Outsourcing exposes firms to fraud . BBC.co.uk . June 16, 2005.  J. Ribeiro 2005. Indian call center workers charged with Citibank fraud . InfoWorld .com . Archived 2015-09-24 at the Wayback Machine  Richard Baldwin . The Great Convergence Information Technology and the New Globalization .  Jim Ditmore. Why IT Outsourcing Often Fails . InformationWeek . ineffectual leadership, process failures, talent issues  Ephraim Schwartz. IT Outsourcing Gone Bad 4 Painful Lessons . In the .. 4 billion deal between the U.S. Navy and .. EDS, .. in 2003, ... reasons behind the failure are complex, but ..  Eric Savitz Andy Sealock Christopher Stacy January 16, 2013. Why Some U.S. Companies Are Giving Up On Outsourcing . Forbes . GM is not the only company to pull back at least a portion of its previously outsourced offshore IT operations.  NYTimes,2017 Mr. Lacerte ... had farmed out but the headaches of navigating time zones, cultures and language ... problems went away when ...  a b Steve Lohr July 30, 2017. Hot Spot for Tech Outsourcing The United States . NYTimes.com .  Carl Richards May 7, 2018. Maybe You Shouldnt Outsource Everything After All . The New York Times .  a b c d e Tamzin Booth January 17, 2013. Here, There and Everywhere - After decades of sending work across the world, companies are rethinking their offshoring strategies . The Economist London. Archived from the original on January 18, 2013 . Retrieved January 19, 2013 . Italic or bold markup not allowed in publisher  help   a b c d Floyd Norris chief financial correspondent January 29, 2013. Outsourcing, Insourcing and Automation . The New York Times .  Outsourcing accelerates forward, 2016 Deloitte 2016 Global Outsourcing Survey accessed 18 August 2016 at Archived copy PDF . Archived from the original PDF on 2017-01-12 . Retrieved 2016-08-18 . CS1 maint archived copy as title  link   Outsourcing, BPO  Contract Manufacturing Market Research-Access Industry Trends, Revenues, Statistics, Forecasts, Technologies, Mailing Lists . Plunkettresearch.com . Retrieved 2017-05-23 .  Margaret Rouse. What is insourcing - Definition from WhatIs.com . Whatis.techtarget.com . Retrieved 2017-05-23 .  Marc J. Schniederjans, Outsourcing and Insourcing In an International Context New York M.E. Sharpe, 2005 3.  Shermon, G 2017. Digital Talent  Business Models and Competencies Page 190  such as taxes, education, or workforce skill sets  David Van Adelsberg, and Edward A Trolley, Strategic Insourcing Getting the Most from the Best, Training and Development 52. no. 7 1998 57-59.  Adam Smith, The Wealth of Nations Part II New York Princeton Library, 1902, 102-104  Robert C. Feenstra, Gordon H. Hanson, Globalization, Outsourcing, and Wage Inequality. American Economic Review 86. no 2 1996 240-245.  Harold L. Sirkin 2011-08-25. Made in America, Again . Bcg.perspectives . Retrieved 2017-05-23 .  Mary Amiti Shang-Jin Wei 2004. Fear of Service Outsourcing Is it Justified PDF . WP04186, International Monetary Fund . Retrieved 2017-05-23 .  Paul Krugman December 12, 2007. The Trouble with Trade . The New York Times .  What to Do Now Shape Up . The Economist . January 2013.  a b Top Reasons for Reshoring in Manufacturing - Manor Tool . Manor Tool . 2015-01-29 . Retrieved 2018-02-08 .  a b Reshoring By the Numbers . IndustryWeek . 2017-03-20 . Retrieved 2018-02-08 .  Business Process Outsourcing  Captive service or third party vendors . OutsourceNews. Archived from the original on 2008-10-11 . Retrieved 2008-10-09 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Gartner Dont forget to insource . Searchcio.techtarget.com . 2003-09-04 . Retrieved 2017-05-23 .  Archived copy . Archived from the original on 2013-03-03 . Retrieved 2013-03-25 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  CS1 maint archived copy as title  link   January The Past and Future of American Manufacturing . Cite magazine requires magazine  help   February Manufacturing is Special Why America Needs its Makers . Cite magazine requires magazine  help   June The Amazing and Puzzling Manufacturing Recovery . Cite magazine requires magazine  help   December The Insourcing Boom . Cite magazine requires magazine  help   Krugman, Paul 2006. Feeling No Pain. New York Times , March 6, 2006.  Bailey, David and Soyoung Kim June 26, 2009. GEs Immelt says U.S. economy needs industrial renewal Archived 2015-06-11 at the Wayback Machine . UK Guardian. . Retrieved on June 28, 2009.  Office of the Press Secretary. President Obama Issues Call to Action to Invest in America at White House Insourcing American Jobs Forum . The White House . Retrieved January 11, 2012 .  Richard Baldwin 2006. Globalisation the great unbundlings, Chapter 1 Globalization Challenges for Europe . Secretariat of the Economic Council, Finnish Prime Ministers Office, Helsinki, 2006.  Stiglitz, J. And Charlton, A., 2005. Trade can be Good for Development, Ch. 2 in Fair Trade for All, Oxford University Press, Oxford, NY.  Hanson, G. 2003, What Has Happened to Wages in Mexico Since NAFTA , NBER Working Paper Series, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.  Krugman, P., Obtsfeld, M. And Melitz, M., 2012 East Asia Success and Crisis, in International Economics Theory and Policy, Addison-Wesley.  Outsourcings Other Side . NYTimes.com . April 25, 2004.  Copeland, B. 2007, Trade and the Environment What do we do now, Ch. 39 in Handbook on International Trade Policy, ed. Kerr, W and Gaosford, J., Edward Elgar Publishing  Christian F. Durach Stefan Kurpjuweit Stephan M. Wagner 2017-09-25. The impact of additive manufacturing on supply chains . International Journal of Physical Distribution  Logistics Management . 47 10 954971. doi  10.1108ijpdlm-11-2016-0332 . ISSN   0960-0035 .  Adidas to mass-produce 3D-printed shoe with Silicon Valley start-up . Reuters . April 7, 2017 . Retrieved 2018-01-02 .  Daisie Hobson. China  Its in the Cards . Reshoring Institute Blog . Retrieved March 17, 2014 .  Easterly, W. 2002, Solows Surprise Investment is not the Key to Growth, Ch. 3 in The Elusive Quest for Growth, The MIT Press, Cambridge.  Outsourcing 2018 USA .  Zogby International survey results online at zogby.com  permanent dead link   Bonasia, J. 2010, December 03. Offshoring, for good or ill, comes of age putting India on the map competitive world markets demand outsourcing, but it does drain domestic jobs. Investors Business Daily. A04.  Congressional Documents and Publications. 2012, May 16. Brown outlines Bring Jobs Home Act aim at encouraging business to bring hobs back to the U.S. 2012 Federal Information and News Dispatch, Inc.  Burgess Everett July 23, 2014. Borrowed time Tale of a Walsh bill . Politico. Archived from the original on July 24, 2014 . Retrieved July 25, 2014 .  S. 2569  Summary . United States Congress. Archived from the original on July 28, 2014 . Retrieved July 25, 2014 .  Tell Xerox to Stop Unionbusting and Shipping Jobs Overseas . American Rights at Work . Archived from the original on 2011-07-14 . Retrieved 2011-03-09 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   U.S. Lagging Behind OECD Corporate Tax Trends . The Tax Foundation. 2006-05-05. Archived from the original on 2009-07-06 . Retrieved 2010-03-15 .  John Tamny. John Tamny on Hillary Clinton Economics on NRO Financial . Article.nationalreview.com. Archived from the original on 2009-01-09 . Retrieved 2010-03-15 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   High Corporate Tax Rate Is Misleading . Smartmoney.com. Archived from the original on 2010-02-10 . Retrieved 2010-03-15 .  Spain, although not in Eastern Europe, offers nearshore outsourcing Lisbon Nearshore  IT Nearshore Services .  Meyer Thomas 2006-08-14. Offshoring to new shores Nearshoring to Central and Eastern Europe PDF . Deutsche Bank . Retrieved 2009-03-22 . Cite journal requires journal  help   Andy Reinhardt 2004-03-01. Forget India, Lets Go To Bulgaria . Business Week . Retrieved 2009-11-07 .  Cerntral and Eastern European Outsourcing Review 2010 PDF Report. 2010 . Retrieved 2013-07-22 .  Outsourcing software development in Ukraine vs Poland . AgileEngine.com . July 23, 2018.  BPO and Shared Services Centers  Polish Investment and Trade .  Poland as the destination for Shared Services Centers . PAIH.gov.PL .   -   -  . www.japaneselawtranslation.go.jp . Retrieved April 10, 2019 .  Outsourcing Opportunities in India , httpsarcgate.comai-training-data-outsourcing  Global Sourcing of Business and IT Services, httpsbooks.google.combooksid_IHStt6MRukC lpg  How to handle material Founding Industries Near Source of Supplies the Best Policy . The New York Times . November 30, 1913. p.  2.  Factory migration . The New York Times . August 6, 1939. p.  5.  Nearshoring .  For U.S.-based employers China or India, vs. Canada or Mexico  a b Sourcingmag.com Dictionary definition  Erran Carmel Pamela Abbott October 2007. Why nearshore means that distance matters . Communications of the ACM .  Stephanie Overby October 6, 2011. IT Outsourcing Study Ranks Best Nearshore Locations for U.S. customers . CIO magazine . Retrieved March 31, 2019 .  When IT challenges overwhelm your company  Start Nearshoring . startnearshoring.com . Retrieved 2018-10-19 .  note the dashhyphen  including repairing  a b Sam Cinquegrani. Nearshoring A Smart Alternative to Offshore . IT Today . Auerbach Publications . Retrieved January 9, 2011 .  Michael Kanellos 2009-05-18. Mexico sells itself as nearshore outsourcing hub for US Venga Venga . Silicon.com . Retrieved 2009-03-22 .  Rae Anne Marsh 2014-01-01. Trade across the border. Arizona is building strong ties with Mexico and Canada . inbusinessmag.com . Retrieved 2014-11-03 .  Custom Software Development Company . nearshore-it.eu . Retrieved 2018-01-22 .  As Philippines Value Prop Sinks, Nearshore Steps Up, Says Atento Exec  Nearshore Americas . Nearshore Americas . 2017-08-23 . Retrieved 2018-08-20 .  The Nearshore English Evolution  Nearshore Americas . Nearshore Americas . Retrieved 2018-09-14 .  H1B  Senator Richard Durbin. Floor Statement H-1B Visa Reform .  5 Facts About Overseas Outsourcing . Center for American Progress . 2012-07-09 . Retrieved 2018-05-31 .  examples Neopost.coms IS-330 Mailing System desktop, Click2mail.com, USPS Web Tool Kit Application Program Interface ... web-based Business Shipping Services  Direct Mail Options .  Jason Deans May 17, 2010. Guardian News  Media to outsource marketing design services . Retrieved April 10, 2019  via www.theguardian.com.  Should You Outsource Your Marketing . Harvard Business School. 2005-007-04.  RSM Marketing  Outsourced Marketing Department . RSM Connect . Retrieved 2018-06-11 .  Leave It To The Experts Should You Outsource Your Marketing . forbes.com . Retrieved 2018-06-11 .  Employee Augmentation  Marketing Outsourcing  THiNK  Marketing Operations Advisory . think-moa.com.au . Retrieved 2017-12-05 .  Jason Deans May 17, 2010. Guardian News  Media to outsource marketing design services . The Guardian . London.  Tas, J.  Sunder, S. 2004, Financial Services Business Process Outsourcing , Communications of the ACM, Vol 47, No. 5  Getting A Piece Of Business Process Outsourcing . Forbes .  J. G. Nellis David Parker 2006. Principles of Business Economics . Financial Times Prentice Hall. p.  213. ISBN   978-0-273-69306-2 .  Sagoo, Anoop. How IT is reinvigorating business process outsourcing CIO. 6 Sep 2012. Retrieved 25 March 2013.  BPM Watch. In-Sourcing Remotely A Closer Look at an Emerging Outsourcing Trend Archived copy . Archived from the original on 2013-03-03 . Retrieved 2013-03-25 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  CS1 maint archived copy as title  link   Archived copy . Archived from the original on 2014-10-25 . Retrieved 2013-03-25 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help  CS1 maint archived copy as title  link   Willcocks, L., Hindle, J., Feeny, D.  Lacity, M. 2004, IT and Business Process Outsourcing The Knowledge Potential , Information Systems Management, Vol. 21, pp 715  Gilley, K.M., Rasheed, A. 2000. Making More by Doing Less An Analysis of Outsourcing and its Effects on Firm Performance. Journal of Management, 26 4 763-790.  Kakabadse, A., Kakabadse. N. 2002. Trends in Outsourcing Contrasting USA and Europe. European Management Journal Vol. 20, No. 2 189198  Tas, Jeroen, Sunder, Shyam. 2004. Financial Services Business Process Outsourcing. COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM Vol. 47, No. 5  Dan Burge Catherine Bingham Amanda Lewis February 1, 2012. Risk transfer in outsourcing contracts . Westlaw .com . Retrieved July 11, 2019 .  Michel, Vaughan, Fitzgerald, Guy. 1997. The IT outsourcing market place vendors and their selection. Journal of Information Technology 12 223-237  Adsit, D. 2009 Will a Toyota Emerge from the Pack of Me-Too BPOs, In Queue Archived copy . Archived from the original on April 10, 2009 . Retrieved May 6, 2009 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  CS1 maint archived copy as title  link   Bunmi Cynthia Adeleye, Fenio Annansingh and Miguel Baptista Nunes. Risk management practices in IS outsourcing an investigation into commercial banks in Nigeria, International Journal of Information Management 24 2004 167-180.  K. Altinkemer, A. Chaturvedi and R. Gulati. Information systems outsourcing Issues and evidence, International Journal of Information Management 14- 4 1994 252- 268.  Forbes Gibb, and Steven Buchanan. A framework for business continuity management, International Journal of Information Management 26- 2 2006 128- 141.  Chyan Yang and Jen-Bor Huang. A decision model for IS outsourcing, International Journal of Information Management 20- 3 2000 225- 239.  L. Willcocks, M. Lacity and G. Fitzgerald. Information technology outsourcing in Europe and the USA Assessment issues, International Journal of Information Management 15-5 1995 333 351.  Robotic Automation Emerges as a Threat to Traditional Low Cost Outsourcing , HfS Research, archived from the original on 2015-09-21 Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Gartner Predicts 2014 Business and IT Services Are Facing the End of Outsourcing as We Know It , Gartner  Visions of the Future The Next Decade in BPO , Outsource Magazine, archived from the original on 2015-04-13 Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Market Trends Outsourcing Contracts, Worldwide , Gartner  Robotic Process Automation at Xchanging PDF , London School of Economics  The battle of the BPO titans Eastern Europe vs. India . itproportal.com .  India holds its global edge in BPM sector with 28billion revenue . ETCIO.com .  Ayan Pramanik October 12, 2017. BPM sector sees faster growth than IT services Nasscom .  Archived copy . Archived from the original on 2017-12-08 . Retrieved 2017-12-07 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help  CS1 maint archived copy as title  link   Chinas service outsourcing grows in 2015 . China Daily. January 20, 2016. Further reading  edit  James K. Jackson 2008-06-24. Outsourcing and Insourcing Jobs in the U.S. Economy Evidence Based on Foreign Investment Data RL32461 . Digitalcommons.ilr.cornell.edu . Congressional Research Service . Retrieved 2017-05-23 . Kate M. Manuel Jack Maskell 2013-02-22. Insourcing Functions Performed by Federal Contractors Legal Issues PDF . Fas.org . Congressional Research Service . Retrieved 2017-05-23 . External links  edit  Look up outsourcing  or nearshoreEnglish in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Quotations related to Outsourcing at Wikiquote v t e International trade Terminology Absolute advantage Balance of payments Balance of trade Capital account Comparative advantage Current account Export-oriented industrialization Fair trade Foreign exchange reserves Globalization Import substitution industrialization Net capital outflow Outsourcing Tariff Trade justice Trade war Trading nation Organizations and policies International Monetary Fund UN Conference on Trade and Development World Bank Group World Trade Organization International Trade Centre International Chamber of Commerce Bilateral investment treaty Economic integration Incoterms ATA Carnet Free-trade zone Special economic zone Trade agreement Trade barrier Trade bloc Political economy Free trade  Adam Smith , The Wealth of Nations , Repeal of the Corn Laws  Mercantilism Protectionism  Economic nationalism , Autarky  Regional organizations Americas Andean Community of Nations Caribbean Community Central American Integration System Mercosur Asia-Pacific Association of Southeast Asian Nations Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation Europe, Central Asia, and North Asia Customs Union of Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Russia Eurasian Economic Union European Union Customs Union Middle East and North Africa Arab Customs Union Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf Subsaharan Africa East African Community Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa Southern African Customs Union West African Economic and Monetary Union Exports by product Aircraft  Spacecraft Aircraft parts Aluminium Cars Car parts Coal Coffee Computers Copper Corn Cotton Diamonds Electricity Engines Gas turbines Gold Integrated circuits Iron ore Natural gas Oil Petrol Pharmaceuticals Ships Steel Telecommunications equipment Telephones Trucks Wheat Wine Category Commons Authority control GND  4127582-2 LCCN  sh2001009057 NDL  00562157 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleOutsourcing oldid913377277Terminology  Categories  B2B Business process Business terms Economic globalization Information technology Information technology management International business International factor movements International trade Office work Offshoring Outsourcing Postal services Telecommuting Hidden categories Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors deprecated parameters CS1 maint archived copy as title CS1 errors markup CS1 errors missing periodical All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 JulianGregorian uncertainty All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2018 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from June 2018 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Articles with unsourced statements from February 2019 Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers