Electronic voting From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search election mechanism The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject . You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.  October 2016   Learn how and when to remove this template message  Part of the Politics series Voting Absentee ballot Abstention Ballot Ballot box Ballot stuffing Caging Coattail effect Compulsory voting Donkey vote Early voting Election boycott Election ink Electorate Electoral fraud Electronic voting Felony disenfranchisement Instant-runoff voting Issue voting Likely voter None of the above Open ballot system Open list Paradox of voting Passive electioneering Polling place Popular vote Postal voting Precinct Protest vote Provisional ballot Refused ballot Secret ballot Spoilt vote Slate Split-ticket voting Straight-ticket voting Tactical voting Tally Ticket Vote center Vote counting Vote pairing Voter apathy Voter fatigue Voter registration Voter suppression Voter turnout Voting booth Voting system Voting machine Write-in candidate Politics portal v t e Electronic voting also known as e-voting  is voting that uses electronic means to either aid or take care of casting and counting votes. Depending on the particular implementation, e-voting may use standalone electronic voting machines also called EVM or computers connected to the Internet. It may encompass a range of Internet services, from basic transmission of tabulated results to full-function online voting through common connectable household devices. The degree of automation may be limited to marking a paper ballot, or may be a comprehensive system of vote input, vote recording, data encryption and transmission to servers, and consolidation and tabulation of election results. A worthy e-voting system must perform most of these tasks while complying with a set of standards established by regulatory bodies, and must also be capable to deal successfully with strong requirements associated with security , accuracy , integrity, swiftness, privacy , auditability , accessibility , cost-effectiveness , scalability and ecological sustainability. Electronic voting technology can include punched cards , optical scan voting systems and specialized voting kiosks including self-contained direct-recording electronic voting systems , or DRE. It can also involve transmission of ballots and votes via telephones, private computer networks , or the Internet . In general, two main types of e-voting can be identified e-voting which is physically supervised by representatives of governmental or independent electoral authorities e.g. electronic voting machines located at polling stations remote e-voting via the Internet also called i-voting where the voter submits their votes electronically to the election authorities, from any location. 1  2  3  4  5  Contents 1 Benefits 2 Concerns 3 Types of system 3.1 Paper-based electronic voting system 3.2 Direct-recording electronic DRE voting system 3.3 Public network DRE voting system 4 Online voting 4.1 Impact on turnout 4.2 Impact on election outcomes 5 Analysis 5.1 Electronic ballots 5.2 Accessibility 5.3 Cryptographic verification 5.4 Voter intent 5.5 Transparency 5.6 Coercion evidence 5.7 Audit trails 5.8 Hardware 5.9 Software 5.10 Testing and certification 5.11 Other 6 By country 6.1 Brazil 6.2 Estonia 6.3 India 6.4 Malaysia 6.5 United States 7 Documented problems with electronic voting 7.1 Australia 7.2 Belgium 7.3 Canada 7.4 India 7.5 Finland 7.6 Netherlands 7.7 United States 8 Popular culture 9 Electronic voting manufacturers 10 Academic efforts 11 See also 12 References 13 External links Benefits  edit  Electronic voting technology intends to speed the counting of ballots, reduce the cost of paying staff to count votes manually and can provide improved accessibility for disabled voters. Also in the long term, expenses are expected to decrease. 6  Results can be reported and published faster. 7  Voters save time and cost by being able to vote independently from their location. This may increase overall voter turnout. The citizen groups benefitiing most from electronic elections are the ones living abroad, citizens living in rural areas far away from polling stations and the disabled with mobility impairments. 8  6  For the country, electronic voting may improve the countrys image and serve as promotion. Concerns  edit  It has been demonstrated that as voting systems become more complex and include software, different methods of election fraud become possible. Others also challenge the use of electronic voting from a theoretical point of view, arguing that humans are not equipped for verifying operations occurring within an electronic machine and that because people cannot verify these operations, the operations cannot be trusted. 9  Furthermore, some computing experts have argued for the broader notion that people cannot trust any programming they did not author. 10  Critics of electronic voting, including security analyst Bruce Schneier , note that computer security experts are unanimous on what to do some voting experts disagree, but it is the computer security experts who need to be listened to the problems here are with the computer, not with the fact that the computer is being used in a voting application... DRE machines must have a voter-verifiable paper audit trails... Software used on DRE machines m ust be open to public scrutiny 11  to ensure the accuracy of the voting system. Verifiable ballots are necessary because computers can and do malfunction, and because voting machines can be compromised. Many insecurities have been found in commercial voting machines, such as using a default administration password. 12  13  Cases have also been reported of machines making unpredictable, inconsistent errors. Key issues with electronic voting are therefore the openness of a system to public examination from outside experts, the creation of an authenticatable paper record of votes cast and a chain of custody for records. 14  15  And, there is a risk that commercial voting machines results are changed by the company providing the machine. There is no guarantee that results are collected and reported accurately. 6  There has been contention, especially in the United States, that electronic voting, especially DRE voting, could facilitate electoral fraud and may not be fully auditable. In addition, electronic voting has been criticised as unnecessary and expensive to introduce. While countries like India continue to use electronic voting, several countries have cancelled e-voting systems or decided against a large-scale rollout, notably the Netherlands , Ireland , Germany and the United Kingdom due to issues in reliability of EVMs. 16  17  Moreover, people without internet access andor the skills to use it are excluded from the service. The so-called digital divide describes the gap between those who have access to the internet and those who do not. Depending on the country or even regions in a country the gap differs. This concern is expected to become less important in future since the number of internet users tends to increase. 18  The main psychological issue is trust. Voters fear that their vote could be changed by a virus on their PC or during transmission to governmental servers. 19  Expenses for the installation of an electronic voting system are high. For some governments they may be too high so that they do not invest. This aspect is even more important if it is not sure whether electronic voting is a long-term solution. 6  Types of system  edit  Electronic voting systems for electorates have been in use since the 1960s 20  when punched card systems debuted. Their first widespread use was in the USA where 7 counties switched to this method for the 1964 presidential election. 20  The newer optical scan voting systems allow a computer to count a voters mark on a ballot. DRE voting machines which collect and tabulate votes in a single machine, are used by all voters in all elections in Brazil and India , and also on a large scale in Venezuela and the United States. They have been used on a large scale in the Netherlands but have been decommissioned after public concerns.  citation needed  Internet voting systems have gained popularity and have been used for government elections and referendums in Estonia , and Switzerland 21  as well as municipal elections in Canada and party primary elections in the United States and France. 22  There are also hybrid systems that include an electronic ballot marking device usually a touch screen system similar to a DRE or other assistive technology to print a voter verified paper audit trail , then use a separate machine for electronic tabulation.  citation needed  Paper-based electronic voting system  edit  A cart holding an ES S M100 ballot scanner and an AutoMARK assistive device , as used in Johnson County, Iowa , United States in 2010. Sometimes called a  document ballot voting system , paper-based voting systems originated as a system where votes are cast and counted by hand , using paper ballots. With the advent of electronic tabulation came systems where paper cards or sheets could be marked by hand, but counted electronically. These systems included punched card voting , marksense and later digital pen voting systems .  citation needed  These systems can include a ballot marking device or electronic ballot marker that allows voters to make their selections using an electronic input device , usually a touch screen system similar to a DRE. Systems including a ballot marking device can incorporate different forms of assistive technology . In 2004, Open Voting Consortium demonstrated the Dechert Design, a General Public License open source paper ballot printing system with open source bar codes on each ballot.  citation needed  Direct-recording electronic DRE voting system  edit  Main article DRE voting machine Electronic voting machine by Premier Election Solutions formerly Diebold Election Systems used in all Brazilian elections and plebiscites. Photo by Agncia Brasil A direct-recording electronic DRE voting machine records votes by means of a ballot display provided with mechanical or electro-optical components that can be activated by the voter typically buttons or a touchscreen  that processes data with computer software and that records voting data and ballot images in memory components . After the election it produces a tabulation of the voting data stored in a removable memory component and as a printed copy. The system may also provide a means for transmitting individual ballots or vote totals to a central location for consolidating and reporting results from precincts at the central location. These systems use a precinct count method that tabulates ballots at the polling place. They typically tabulate ballots as they are cast and print the results after the close of polling. 23  In 2002, in the United States, the Help America Vote Act mandated that one handicapped accessible voting system be provided per polling place, which most jurisdictions have chosen to satisfy with the use of DRE voting machines, some switching entirely over to DRE. In 2004, 28.9 of the registered voters in the United States used some type of direct recording electronic voting system, 24  up from 7.7 in 1996. 25  VVPAT used with Indian electronic voting machines in Indian Elections In 2004, India adopted Electronic Voting Machines EVM for its elections to its parliament with 380 million voters casting their ballots using more than one million voting machines. 26  The Indian EVMs are designed and developed by two government-owned defence equipment manufacturing units, Bharat Electronics Limited BEL and Electronics Corporation of India Limited ECIL. Both systems are identical, and are developed to the specifications of Election Commission of India . The system is a set of two devices running on 7.5 volt batteries. One device, the voting Unit is used by the voter, and another device called the control unit is operated by the electoral officer. Both units are connected by a five-metre cable. The voting unit has a blue button for each candidate. The unit can hold 16 candidates, but up to four units can be chained, to accomm odate 64 candidates. The control unit has three buttons on the surface  one button to release a single vote, one button to see the total number of votes cast till now, and one button to close the election process. The result button is hidden and sealed. It cannot be pressed unless the close button has already been pressed. A controversy was raised when the voting machine malfu nctioned which was shown in Delhi assembly. 27  On 9 April 2019, the Supreme Court ordered the ECI to increase voter-verified paper audit trail VVPAT slips vote count to five randomly selected EVMs per assembly constituency, which means ECI has to count VVPAT slips of 20,625 EVMs before it certifies the final election results. 28  29  30  Public network DRE voting system  edit  A public network DRE voting system is an election system that uses electronic ballots and transmits vote data from the polling place to another location over a public network. Vote data may be transmitted as individual ballots as they are cast, periodically as batches of ballots throughout the election day, or as one batch at the close of voting. This includes Internet voting a s well as telephone voting. Public network DRE voting system can utilize either precinct count or central count method. The central count method tabulates ballots from multiple precincts at a central location. Internet voting can use remote locations voting from any Internet capable computer or can use traditional polling locations with voting booths consisting of Internet connected voting systems. Corporations and organizations routinely use Internet voting to elect officers and board members and for other proxy elections. Internet voting systems have been used privately in many modern nations and publicly in the United States, the UK , Switzerland and Estonia. In Switzerland, where it is already an established part of local referendums, voters get their passwords to access the ballot through the postal service. Most voters in Estonia can cast their vote in local and parliamentary elections, if they want to, via the Internet, as most of those on the electoral roll have access to an e-voting system, the large st run by any European Union country. It has been made possible because most Estonians carry a national identity card equipped with a computer-readable microchip and it is these cards which they use to get access to the online ballot. All a voter needs is a computer, an electronic card reader, their ID card and its PIN, and they can vote from anywhere in the world. Estonian e-votes can only be cast during the days of advance voting . On election day itself people have to go to polling stations and fill in a paper ballot. Online voting  edit  Not to be confused with Open access poll . In March 2000 the Arizona Democratic Party ran its Presidential Primary over the internet using the private company votation.com. 31  Each registered member of the party received a personal identification number in the mail. These citizens had the option to either cast ballots at a designated location or over the internet from the comfort of their own home. Voters voting over the internet were required to insert their PIN and answer two personal questions. Once all the information is verified, they have the voting options. 32  By 2009, Estonia had advanced the farthest in utilizing Internet voting technology. 33  In Estonia, each voter has a national ID card that they use to identify each citizen. The ID card is the security Estonia put in to ensure reliability in votes. Security officials said that they have not detected any unusual activity or tampering of the votes. 34  Impact on turnout  edit  A 2017 study of online voting in two Swiss cantons found that it had no effect on turnout. 35  A paper on remote electronic voting and turnout in the Estonian 2007 parliamentary elections showed that rather than eliminating inequalities, e-voting might have enhanced the digital divide between higher and lower socioeconomic classes. People who lived greater distances from polling areas voted at higher levels with this service now available. The 2007 Estonian elections yielded a higher voter turnout from those who lived in higher income regions and who received formal education. 36  Impact on election outcomes  edit  The use of electronic voting in elections remains a contentious issue. Some countries such as Netherlands and Germany have stopped using it after it was shown to be unreliable, while the Indian Election commission recommends it. The involvement of numerous stakeholders including companies that manufacture these machines as well as political parties that stand to gain from riggi ng complicates this further. 37  A 2017 study of Brazil found no systematic difference in vote choices between online and offline electorates. 38  However, it has been also argued that the rigging of EVMs influenced the results of elections in India in 2017 to a large extent. 39  In relation with electoral management, a research ran in Estonia show that internet voting is the most cost-efficient system when compared with other voting channels. 40  It has further been argued political parties that have more support from the less fortunatewho are unfamiliar with the Internetmay suffer in the elections due to e-voting, which tends to increase voting in the uppermiddle class. It is unsure as to whether narrowing the digital divide would promote equal voting opportunities for people across various social, economic and ethn ic backgrounds. In the long run, this is contingent not only on internet accessibility, which is already widely available in Estonia, but also depends on peoples level of familiarity with the Internet. 36  The security of these in person electronic voting machines is almost entirely dependent on the implementation of security protocols at each locality. A group of researchers studying the recent Estonian elections describe massive operational lapses in security from transferring election results on personal thumb drives to posting network credentials on the wall in view of the pu blic. The researchers concluded that these systems are insecure in their current implementation, and due to the rise of nation state interest in influencing elections, should be discontinued. 41  Analysis  edit  ISG TopVoter, a machine designed specifically to be used by voters with disabilities. Electronic voting systems may offer advantages compared to other voting techniques. An electronic voting system can be involved in any one of a number of steps in the setup, distributing, voting, collecting, and counting of ballots, and thus may or may not introduce advantages into any of these steps. Potential disadvantages exist as well including the potential for flaws or we akness in any electronic component. Charles Stewart of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology estimates that 1 million more ballots were counted in the 2004 USA presidential election than in 2000 because electronic voting machines detected votes that paper-based machines would have missed. 42  In May 2004 the U.S. Government Accountability Office released a report titled Electronic Voting Offers Opportunities and Presents Challenges, 43  analyzing both the benefits and concerns created by electronic voting. A second report was released in September 2005 detailing some of the concerns with electronic voting, and ongoing improvements, titled Federal Efforts to Improve Security and Reliability of Electronic Voting Systems Are Under Way, but Key Activities Need to Be Completed. 44  Electronic ballots  edit  Electronic voting systems may use electronic ballot to store votes in computer memory . Systems which use them exclusively are called DRE voting systems. When electronic ballots are used there is no risk of exhausting the supply of ballots. Additionally, these electronic ballots remove the need for printing of paper ballots, a significant cost. 45  When administering elections in which ballots are offered in multiple languages in some areas of the United States, public elections are required by the National Voting Rights Act of 1965 , electronic ballots can be programmed to provide ballots in multiple languages for a single machine. The advantage with respect to ballots in different languages appears to be unique to electronic voting. For example, King County, Washington s demographics require them under U.S. federal election law to provide ballot access in Chinese . With any type of paper ballot, the county has to decide how many Chinese-language ballots to print, how many to make available at each polling place, etc. Any strategy that can assure that Chinese-language ballots will be available at all polling places is certain, at the very least, to result in a significant number of wasted ballots.  citation needed  The situation with lever machines would be even worse than with paper the only apparent way to reliably meet the need would be to set up a Chinese-language lever machine at each polling place, few of which would be used at all. Critics argue  who  the need for extra ballots in any language can be mitigated by providing a process to print ballots at voting locations. They argue further, the cost of software validation, compiler trust validation, installation validation, delivery validation and validation of other steps related to electronic voting is complex and expensive, thus electronic ballots are not guaranteed to b e less costly than printed ballots.  citation needed  Accessibility  edit  A Hart eSlate DRE voting machine with jelly buttons for people with manual dexterity disabilities. Electronic voting machines can be made fully accessible for persons with disabilities. Punched card and optical scan machines are not fully accessible for the blind or visually impaired, and lever machines can be difficult for voters with limited mobility and strength. 46  Electronic machines can use headphones, sip and puff , foot pedals, joy sticks and other adaptive technology to provide the necessary accessibility . Organizations such as the Verified Voting Foundation have criticized the accessibility of electronic voting machines 47  and advocate alternatives. Some disabled voters including the visually impaired could use a tactile ballot , a ballot system using physical markers to indicate where a mark should be made, to vote a secret paper ballot. These ballots can be designed identically to those used by other voters. 48  However, other disabled voters including voters with dexterity disabilities could be unable to use these ballots. Cryptographic verification  edit  The concept of election verifiability through cryptographic solutions has emerged in the academic literature to introduce transparency and trust in electronic voting systems. 49  50  It allows voters and election observers to verify that votes have been recorded, tallied and declared correctly, in a manner independent from the hardware and software running the election. Three aspects of verifiability are considered 51  individual, universal, and eligibility. Individual verifiability allows a voter to check that her own vote is included in the election outcome, universal verifiability allows voters or election observers to check that the election outcome corresponds to the votes cast, and eligibility verifiability allows voters and observers to check that each vote in the election outcome was cast by a uniquely registered voter. Voter intent  edit  Electronic voting machines are able to provide immediate feedback to the voter detecting such possible problems as undervoting and overvoting which may result in a spoiled ballot . This immediate feedback can be helpful in successfully determining voter intent . Transparency  edit  It has been alleged by groups such as the UK-based Open Rights Group 52  53  that a lack of testing, inadequate audit procedures, and insufficient attention given to system or process design with electronic voting leaves elections open to error and fraud . In 2009, the Federal Constitutional Court of Germany found that when using voting machines the verification of the result must be possible by the citizen reliably and without any specialist knowledge of the subject. The DRE Nedap-computers used till then did not fulfill that requirement. The decision did not ban electronic voting as such, but requires all essential steps in elections to be subject to public examinability. 54  55  In 2013, The California Association of Voting Officials was formed to maintain efforts toward publicly owned General Public License open source voting systems Coercion evidence  edit  In 2013, researchers from Europe proposed that the electronic voting systems should be coercion evident. 56  There should be a public evidence of the amount of coercion that took place in a particular elections. An internet voting system called  Caveat Coercitor  57  shows how coercion evidence in voting systems can be achieved. 56  Audit trails  edit  Further information Voter Verified Paper Audit Trail and End-to-end auditable voting systems A fundamental challenge with any voting machine is produce evidence that the votes were recorded as cast and tabulated as recorded. Election results produced by voting systems that rely on voter-marked paper ballots can be verified with manual hand counts either valid sampling or full recounts. Non-document ballot voting systems must support auditability in different ways. An independently auditable system, sometimes called an Independent Verification, can be used in recounts or audits. These systems can include the ability for voters to verify how their votes were cast or enable officials to verify that votes were tabulated correctly. A discussion draft argued by researchers at the National Institute of Standards and Technology NIST states, Simply put, the DRE architectures inability to provide for independent audits of its electronic records makes it a poor choice for an environment in which detecting errors and fraud is important. 58  The report does not represent the official position of NIST, and misinterpretations of the report has led NIST to explain that Some statements in the report have been misinterpreted. The draft report includes statements from election officials, voting system vendors, computer scientists and other experts in the field about what is potentially possible in terms of attacks on D REs. However, these statements are not report conclusions. 59  A Diebold Election Systems, Inc. model AccuVote-TSx DRE voting machine with VVPAT attachment. Various technologies can be used to assure DRE voters that their votes were cast correctly, and allow officials to detect possible fraud or malfunction, and to provide a means to audit the tabulated results. Some systems include technologies such as cryptography visual or mathematical, paper kept by the voter or verified and left with election officials, audio verification, and dual recording or witness systems other than with paper. Dr. Rebecca Mercuri , the creator of the Voter Verified Paper Audit Trail VVPAT concept as described in her Ph.D. dissertation in October 2000 on the basic voter verifiable ballot system, proposes to answer the auditability question by having the voting machine print a paper ballot or other paper facsimile that can be visually verified by the voter before being entered into a secure location. Subsequently, this is sometimes referred to as the  Mercuri method . To be truly voter -verified, the record itself must be verified by the voter and able to be done without assistance, such as visually or audibly. If the voter must use a bar-code scanner or other electronic device to verify, then the record is not truly voter-verifiable, since it is actually the electronic device that is verifying the record for the voter. VVPAT is the form of Independent Verif ication most commonly found in elections in the United States and other countries such as Venezuela. 60  End-to-end auditable voting systems can provide the voter with a receipt that can be taken home. This receipt does not allow voters to prove to others how they voted, but it does allow them to verify that the system detected their vote correctly. End-to-end E2E systems include Punchscan , ThreeBallot and Prt  Voter . Scantegrity is an add-on that extends current optical scan voting systems with an E2E layer. The city of Takoma Park, Maryland used Scantegrity II for its November, 2009 election. 61  62  Systems that allow the voter to prove how they voted are never used in U.S. public elections, and are outlawed by most state constitutions. The primary concerns with this solution are voter intimidation and vote selling . An audit system can be used in measured random recounts to detect possible malfunction or fraud. With the VVPAT method, the paper ballot is often treated as the official ballot of record. In this scenario, the ballot is primary and the electronic records are used only for an initial count. In any subsequent recounts or challenges, the paper, not the electronic ballot, would be used for tabulation. Whenever a paper record serves as the legal ballot, that system will be subject to the same benefits and concerns as any paper ballot system. To successfully audit any voting machine, a strict chain of custody is required. The solution was first demonstrated New York City, March 2001 and used Sacramento, California 2002 by AVANTE International Technology, Inc.. In 2004 Nevada was the first state to successfully implement a DRE voting system that printed an electronic record. The 9.3 million voting system provided by Sequoia Voting Systems included more than 2,600 AVC EDGE touchscreen DREs equipped with the VeriVote VVPAT component. 63  The new systems, implemented under the direction of then Secretary of State Dean Heller replaced largely punched card voting systems and were chosen after feedback was solicited from the community through town hall meetings and input solicited from the Nevada Gaming Control Board . 64  Hardware  edit  Inadequately secured hardware can be subject to physical tampering . Some critics, such as the group Wij vertrouwen stemcomputers niet We do not trust voting machines, charge that, for instance, foreign hardware could be inserted into the machine, or between the user and the central mechanism of the machine itself, using a man in the middle attack technique, and thus even sealing DRE machines may not be sufficient protection. 65  This claim is countered by the position that review and testing procedures can detect fraudulent code or hardware, if such things are present, and that a thorough, verifiable chain of custody would prevent the insertion of such hardware or software.  citation needed  Security seals are commonly employed in an attempt to detect tampering, but testing by Argonne National Laboratory and others demonstrates that existing seals can usually be quickly defeated by a trained person using low-tech methods. 66  Software  edit  Security experts, such as Bruce Schneier , have demanded that voting machine source code should be publicly available for inspection. 67  Others have also suggested publishing voting machine software under a free software license as is done in Australia. 68  Testing and certification  edit  See also Certification of voting machines One method to any error with voting machines is parallel testing , which are conducted on the Election Day with randomly picked machines. The ACM published a study showing that, to change the outcome of the 2000 U.S. Presidential election, only 2 votes in each precinct would have needed to be changed. 69  Other  edit  Criticisms can be mitigated by review and testing procedures to detect fraudulent code or hardware, if such things are present, and through a verifiable chain of custody to prevent the insertion of such hardware or software.  citation needed  Critics also mention the increasing number of attack programs that online voting systems are greatly susceptible to. Malicious payloads- software data intended to do damage- have become so advanced that they can easily change a voters vote without any knowledge to other parties, regardless of voter identification or encryption software. 70  Benefits can include reduced tabulation times and an increase of participation  voter turnout , particularly through the use of Internet voting.  citation needed  Those in opposition suggest alternate vote counting systems , citing Switzerland as well as many other countries, which uses paper ballots exclusively, suggesting that electronic voting is not the only means to get a rapid count of votes. A country of a little over 7 million people, Switzerland publishes a definitive ballot count in about six hours. In villages, the ballots are even counted manually.  citation needed  Critics also note that it becomes difficult or impossible to verify the identity of a voter remotely, and that the introduction of public networks become more vulnerable and complex.  citation needed  Whether the total cost of ownership with electronic voting is lower than other systems is not yet  when  clear.  citation needed  By country  edit  Main article Electronic voting by country Polling place electronic voting or Internet voting examples have taken place in Australia, 71  Belgium, 72  73  Brazil, Canada, 74  Estonia, 75  76  France, Germany, India, 26  Italy, Namibia, the Netherlands  Rijnland Internet Election System , Norway, Peru, Switzerland, the UK, 77  Venezuela, 78  and the Philippines. 79  Brazil  edit  Main article Electronic voting in Brazil In 1996, after tests conducted by more than 50 municipalities, the Brazilian Electoral Justice launched their voting machine. Since 2000, all Brazilian voters are able to use the electronic ballot boxes to choose their candidates. In 2010 presidential election which had more than 135 million voters, the result was announced 75 minutes after the end of voting. The electronic ballot box is made up of two micro-terminals one located in the voting cabin and the other with the voting board representative which are connected by a 5-meter cable. Externally, the micro-terminals have only a numerical keyboard, which does not accept any com mand executed by the simultaneous pressure of more than one key. In case of power failure, the internal battery provides the energy or it can be connected to an automotive battery. 80  Estonia  edit  Main article Electronic voting in Estonia Each Estonian citizen possesses an electronic chip-enabled ID card, which allows the user to vote over the internet. The ID card is inserted into a card reader, which is connected to a computer. Once the users identity is verified using the electronic ID card as a sort of digital signature, a vote can be cast via the internet. Votes are not considered final until the end of election day, so Estonian citizens can go back and re-cast their votes until election day is officially over. The popularity of online voting in Estonia has increased widely throughout the nation, as in the elections of 2014 and 2015, nearly one third of Estonian votes were cast online. 81  82  India  edit  Main article Electronic voting in India Electronic Voting Machines EVM are being used in Indian general and state elections to implement electronic voting in part from 1999 general election and recently in 2018 state elections held in five states across India. EVMs have replaced paper ballots in the state and general parliamentary elections in India. There were earlier claims regarding EVMs tamperability and security which have not been proved. After rulings of Delhi High Court , Supreme Court and demands from various political parties, Election Commission of India decided to introduce EVMs with voter-verified paper audit trail VVPAT system. The VVPAT system was introduced in 8 of 543 parliamentary constituencies as a pilot project in 2014 general election . Voter-verified paper audit trail VVPAT system which enables electronic voting machines to record each vote cast by generating the EVM slip, was introduced in all 543 Lok sabha constituencies in 2019 Indian general election . There are three kinds of electronic voting machines M1, M2 and M3. 83  The most modern M3 EVMs, which are in current use since its introduction in 2013, allow writing of machine code into the chips at PSU premises itself- Bharat Electronics Limited , Bangalore and Electronics Corporation of India Limited , Hyderabad . Election Commission of India introduced EVM Tracking Software ETS as a modern inventory management system where the identity and physical presence of all EVMS VVPATs is tracked on real time basis. M3 EVMs has digital verification system coded into each machine which is necessary to establish contact between its two component units. There are several layers of seals to ensure it is tamper-proof. Indian EVMs are stand-alone non-networked machines. 84  85  Malaysia  edit  Electronic voting had been used in 2018 Peoples Justice Party leadership election , which is the party election for the countrys largest party. It had suffer many technical problems and many polls had been postponed due to the poor system. 86  87  United States  edit  Main article Electronic voting by country   United States of America The Uniformed and Overseas Citizens Absentee Voting Act of 1986 requires states and territories to allow overseas military personnel and citizens to vote in federal elections. The Military and Overseas Voter Empowerment Act of 2009 amended this law to require delivery of ballots by at least one electronic means email, fax, or web site. As of September 2016, submission of ballots is done by mail in 18 states the other states and the District of Columbia allow submission by one or more of email, fax, or secure web site. 88  States that allow remote electronic voting outside of UOCAVA 88  Alaska allows fax and web voting by any registered voter Hawaii allows email voting by any permanent absentee voter who has not received a ballot within five days of an election Idaho allows email and fax voting in declared emergencies Utah allows email and fax voting for those with disabilities There are also measures in place for American astronauts who cannot vote in person and are unable to vote via absentee ballot, such as those aboard the International Space Station , to cast their ballots in federal elections electronically from orbit since 1997. Ballots are sent via secure email to the Johnson Spaceflight Center and then passed on to the astronauts home counties in Texas. 89  90  Documented problems with electronic voting  edit  Australia  edit  iVote is a remote electronic voting system in New South Wales that allows eligible voters a chance to vote over the Internet. However, during the New South Wales state election in 2015, there were several reports that over 66,000 electronic votes could have been compromised. Although the iVote website is secure, security specialist believe that a third party website was able to attack the system. This was the first time a major vulnerability was discovered in the middle of an ongoing poll. 91  Belgium  edit  Main article Electronic voting in Belgium In the elections on 18. May 2003 there was an electronic voting problem reported where one candidate got 4096 extra votes. The error was only detected because she had more preferential votes that her own list which is impossible in the voting system . The official explanation was The spontaneous creation of a bit at the position 13 in the memory of the computer i.e. a soft error . 92  Canada  edit  See also Electronic voting in Canada The 2012 New Democratic Party leadership election was conducted partially online, with party members who were not in attendance at the convention hall able to cast their leadership vote online. However, for part of the day the online voting server was affected by a denial-of-service attack , delaying the completion and tabulation of results. 93  In the 2018 Ontario municipal elections , over 150 municipalities in the Canadian province of Ontario conducted their elections primarily online, with physical polling stations either abandoned entirely or limited to only a few central polling stations for voters who could not or did not want to vote online. 94  On election day, however, 51 of those municipalities, all of which had selected Dominion Voting Systems as their online voting contractor, were affected by a technical failure. According to Dominion, the companys colocation centre provider imposed a bandwidth cap, without authorization from or consultation with Dominion, due to the massive increase in voting traffic in the early evening, thus making it impossible for many voters to get through to the server between 500 and 730  p.m. 95  All of the affected municipalities extended voting for at least a few hours to compensate for the outage several, including Pembroke , Waterloo , Prince Edward County and Greater Sudbury , opted to extend voting for a full 24 hours into the evening of October 23. 96  India  edit  Omesh Saigal, an IIT alumnus and IAS officer, demonstrated that the 2009 elections in India when Congress Party of India came back to power might be rigged. This forced the election commission to review the current EVMs. 97  Finland  edit  In Finland , electronic voting has never been used in large scale all voting is conducted by pen and paper and the ballots are always counted by hand. In 2008, the Finnish government wanted to test electronic voting, and organized a pilot electronic vote for the 2008 Finnish municipal elections , conducted in three municipalities  Karkkila , Kauniainen and Vihti . Following complaints, the Supreme Administrative Court declared the results invalid, and ordered a rerun of the elections with the regular pen-and-paper method in the affected municipalities. The system had a usability problem where the messages were ambiguous on whether the vote had been cast. In a total of 232 cases 2 of votes, voters had logged in, selected their vote but not confirmed it, and left the booth the votes were not recorded. 98  Following the failure of the pilot election, the Finnish government has abandoned plans to continue electronic voting based on voting machines. In the memo 99  it was concluded that the voting machine will not developed any more, but the Finnish government will nevertheless follow the development of different electronic voting systems worldwide. Netherlands  edit  On October 30, 2006, the Dutch Minister of the Interior withdrew the license of 1187 voting machines from manufacturer Sdu NV, about 10 of the total number to be used, because it was proven by the General Intelligence and Security Service that one could eavesdrop on voting from up to 40 meters using Van Eck phreaking . 100  National elections are to be held 24 days after this decision. The decision was forced by the Dutch grass roots organisation Wij vertrouwen stemcomputers niet 101  We do not trust voting computers. 102  103  United States  edit  A number of problems with voting systems in Florida since the 2000 Presidential election . 104  Fairfax County, Virginia, November 4, 2003. Some voters complained that they would cast their vote for a particular candidate and the indicator of that vote would go off shortly after. 105  The Premier Election Solutions formerly Diebold Election Systems TSx voting system disenfranchised many voters in Alameda and San Diego Counties during the March 2, 2004, California presidential primary due to non-functional voter card encoders. 106  On April 30 Californias secretary of state Kevin Shelley decertified all touch-screen machines and recommended criminal prosecution of Diebold Election Systems. 107  The California Attorney-General decided against criminal prosecution, but subsequently joined a lawsuit against Diebold for fraudulent claims made to election officials. Diebold settled that lawsuit by paying 2.6 million. 108  On February 17, 2006 the California Secretary of State Bruce McPherson then recertified Diebold Election Systems DRE and Optical Scan Voting System. 109  In Napa County, California, March 2, 2004, an improperly calibrated marksense scanner overlooked 6,692 absentee ballot votes. 110  Instances of faulty technology and security issues surrounding these machines were documented on August 1, 2001, in the Brennan Center at New York University Law School. NY University Law School released a report with more than 60 examples of e-voting machine failures in 26 states in 2004 and 2006. Examples included Spanish language ballots that were cast by voters but not coun ted in Sacramento in 2004.  citation needed  In 2010, graduate students from the University of Michigan hacked into the District of Columbia online voting systems during an online voting mock test run and changed all the cast ballots to cater to their preferred candidates. This voting system was being tested for military voters and overseas citizens, allowing them to vote on the Web, and was scheduled to run later that ye ar. It only took the hackers, a team of computer scientists, thirty-six hours to find the list of the governments passwords and break into the system. 111  Problems in the 2006 United States general elections During early voting in Miami, Hollywood and Fort Lauderdale, Florida, in October 2006 three votes intended to be recorded for Democratic candidates were displaying as cast for Republican. Election officials attributed it to calibration errors in the touch screen of the voting system. 112  In Pennsylvania, a computer programming error forced some to cast paper ballots. In Indiana, 175 precincts also resorted to paper. Counties in those states also extended poll hours to make up for delays. 113  Cuyahoga County, Ohio  The Diebold computer server froze and stopped counting votes then the printers jammed so paper copies could not be retrieved for many votes and there was no way to be sure of the accuracy of the votes when the votes were being counted. 114  Waldenburg, Arkansas The touch screen computer tallied zero votes for one mayoral candidate who confirmed that he certainly voted for himself and therefore there would be a minimum of one vote this is a case of disappearing votes on touchscreen machines. 115  Sarasota, Florida There was an 18,000-person undervote in a congressional election. 115  The subsequent investigation 116  found that the undervote was not caused by software error. Poor ballot design was widely acknowledged as the cause of the undervote. 2008 United States elections Virginia, Tennessee, and Texas Touch screen voting machines flipped votes in early voting trials. 117  Humboldt County, California  A security flaw erased 197 votes from the computer database. 118  California top-to-bottom review In May 2007, California Secretary of State Debra Bowen commissioned a top-to-bottom review of all electronic voting systems in the state. She engaged computer security experts led by the University of California to perform security evaluations of voting system source code as well as red teams running worst case Election Day scenarios attempting to identify vulnerabilities to tampering or error. The Top to Bottom review also included a comprehensive review of manufacturer documentation as well as a review of accessibility features and alternative language requirements. The end results of the tests were released in the four detailed Secretary of State August 3, 2007, resolutions for Diebold Election Systems, Hart InterCivic, Sequoia Voting Systems and Elections Systems and Software, Inc. and updated October 25, 2007 revised resolutions for Diebold and Sequoia voting systems. 119  The security experts found significant security flaws in all of the manufacturers voting systems, flaws that could allow a single non-expert to compromise an entire election. On August 3, 2007, Bowen decertified machines that were tested in her top-to-bottom view including the ES S InkaVote machine, which was not included in the review because the company submitted it past the deadline for testing. The report issued July 27, 2007, was conducted by the expert red team attempting to detect the levels of technological vulnerability. Another report on August 2, 2007 was conducted by a source code review team to detect flaws in voting system source code. Both report s found that three of the tested systems fell far short of the minimum requirements specified in the 2005 Voluntary Voting System Guidelines VVSG. Some of the systems tested were conditionally recertified with new stringent security requirements imposed. 120  The companies in question have until the February 2008 California Presidential Primaries to fix their security issues and ensure that election results can be closely audited. The Premier Election Solutions formerly Diebold Election Systems  AccuVote-TSx voting system was studied by a group of Princeton University computer scientists in 2006. Their results showed that the AccuVote-TSx was insecure and could be installed with vote-stealing software in under a minute. The scientists also said that machines can transmit computer viruses from one to another during normal pre- and post-election activity. 121  2000 presidential election in Florida Punched cards received considerable notoriety in 2000 when their uneven use in Votomatic style systems in Florida was alleged to have affected the outcome of the U.S. presidential election . Invented by Joseph P. Harris, Votomatic was manufactured for a time under license by IBM. William Rouverol, who built the prototype and wrote patents, stated that after the patents expired in 1982, lower quality machines had appeared on the market. The machines used in Florida had five times as many errors as a true Votomatic, he said. 122  Punched-card-based voting systems, the Votomatic system in particular, use special cards where each possible hole is pre-scored, allowing perforations to be made by the voter pressing a stylus through a guide in the voting machine . A problem with this system is the incomplete punch this can lead to a smaller hole than expected, or to a mere slit in the card, or to a mere dimple in the card, or to a hanging chad . This technical problem was claimed by the Democratic Party to have influenced the 2000 U.S. presidential election in the state of Florida critics claimed that punched card voting machines were primarily used in Democratic areas and that hundreds of ballots were not read properly or were disqualified due to incomplete punches, which allegedly tipped the vote in favor of George W. Bush over Al Gore . Popular culture  edit  In the 2006 film Man of the Year starring Robin Williams , the character played by Williamsa comedic host of political talk showwins the election for President of the United States when a software error in the electronic voting machines produced by the fictional manufacturer Delacroy causes votes to be tallied inaccurately. In Runoff , a 2007 novel by Mark Coggins , a surprising showing by the Green Party candidate in a San Francisco Mayoral election forces a runoff between him and the highly favored establishment candidatea plot line that closely parallels the actual results of the 2003 election. When the private-eye protagonist of the book investigates at the behest of a powerful Chinatown businesswoman, he determines that the outcome was rigged by someone who defeated the security on the citys newly installed e-voting system. 123   Hacking Democracy  is a 2006 documentary film shown on HBO . Filmed over three years, it documents American citizens investigating anomalies and irregularities with electronic voting systems that occurred during Americas 2000 and 2004 elections, especially in Volusia County, Florida . The film investigates the flawed integrity of electronic voting machines, particularly those made by Diebold Election Systems and culminates in the hacking of a Diebold election system in Leon County, Florida . The central conflict in the MMO video game Infantry resulted from the global institution of direct democracy through the use of personal voting devices sometime in the 22nd century AD. The practice gave rise to a voting class of citizens composed mostly of homemakers and retirees who tended to be at home all day. Because they had the most free time to participate in voting, their opinions ultimately came to dominate politics. 124  Electronic voting manufacturers  edit  AccuPoll Advanced Voting Solutions , formerly Shoup Voting Machine Co. Bharat Electronics Limited India Dominion Voting Systems Canada Electronics Corporation of India Ltd ES S United States Everyone Counts United States Hart InterCivic United States MicroVote Nedap  Netherlands  Premier Election Solutions formerly Diebold Election Systems United States Safevote Sequoia Voting Systems United States Scytl Spain Smartmatic VOTEX  TM Technologies Elections Inc. Canada Academic efforts  edit  Bingo Voting Prt  Voter Punchscan See also  edit  Certification of voting machines E-democracy Electoral fraud Soft error Vote counting system Voting machine References  edit   i-Voting . e-Estonia . Archived from the original on 2017-02-11. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Res. 9597 Philippines concerning grid power requirements for various needs including i-voting . nea.gov.ph . Archived from the original on 2013-07-02. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Switzerlands new legislation on internet voting . electoralpractice.ch . Archived from the original on 2015-04-02 . Retrieved 2019-02-05 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Buchsbaum, T. 2004. E-voting International developments and lessons learnt. Proceedings of Electronic Voting in Europe Technology, Law, Politics and Society. Lecture Notes in Informatics. Workshop of the ESF TED Programme Together with GI and OCG .  Zissis, D. Lekkas April 2011. Securing e-Government and e-Voting with an open cloud computing architecture. Government Information Quarterly . 28 2 239251. doi  10.1016j.giq.2010.05.010 .  a b c d Cook, T. 2016, December 7. How Electronic Voting Works Pros and Cons vs. paper Voting. MUO . Retrieved June 10, 2019 from httpswww.makeuseof.comtaghow-electronic-voting-works  How Electronic Voting Works Pros and Cons vs. Paper Voting . MakeUseOf .  httpsAnwar , N. K. n.d.. Advantages and Disadvantages of e-Voting The Estonian Experience. Academia.edu . Retrieved June 10, 2019 from www.academia.edu35246981Advantages_and_Disadvantages_of_e-Voting_The_Estonian_Experience  Hagai Bar-El. Why secure e-voting is so hard to get . Archived from the original on 2015-09-12. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Thompson, Ken August 1984 Reflections on Trusting Trust  Schneier, Bruce September 2004, openDemocracy Archived 2007-06-09 at the Wayback Machine Whats wrong with electronic voting machines Archived 2008-05-22 at the Wayback Machine  Schneier, Bruce. An Incredibly Insecure Voting Machine . Schneier on Security . Archived from the original on 8 December 2015 . Retrieved 3 December 2015 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Feldman, Halterman  Felten. Security Analysis of the Diebold AccuVote-TS Voting Machine . Usenix . Archived from the original on 8 December 2015 . Retrieved 3 December 2015 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Schneier, Bruce. Whats Wrong With Electronic Voting Machines . Schneier on Security . Archived from the original on 8 December 2015 . Retrieved 3 December 2015 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Wichita State mathematician says Kansas voting machines need to be audited to check accuracy . Topeka Capital-Journal . Archived from the original on 3 December 2015 . Retrieved 3 December 2015 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Kobie, Nicole. Why electronic voting isnt secure . The Guardian . Archived from the original on 8 December 2015 . Retrieved 3 December 2015 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Hern, Alex. Should Britain introduce electronic voting . The Guardian . Archived from the original on 8 December 2015 . Retrieved 3 December 2015 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Number of internet users worldwide 2005-2018 . Statista .  Anwar, N. K. n.d.. Advantages and Disadvantages of e-Voting The Estonian Experience. Academia.edu . Retrieved June 10, 2019 from httpswww.academia.edu35246981Advantages_and_Disadvantages_of_e-Voting_The_Estonian_Experience  a b Saltman, Roy. EFFECTIVE USE OF COMPUTING TECHNOLOGY IN VOTE-TALLYING Archived 2016-02-11 at Wikiwix. NIST .  Serdlt, U. April 2015. Fifteen Years of Internet Voting in Switzerland History, Governance and Use . pp.  126132. doi  10.1109ICEDEG.2015.7114487 . ISBN   978-3-9075-8910-6 .  Event List PDF . caltech.edu . Archived from the original PDF on 2016-03-04. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   U.S. Election Assistance Commission . 2005 Voluntary Voting System Guidelines . Archived from the original PDF on February 7, 2008. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Kids Voting Central Ohio. A Short History of Voting in the United States PDF . Archived from the original PDF on 2010-12-23. Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   U.S. Federal Election Commission . Direct Recording Electronic information page . Archived from the original on 2007-11-14. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   a b Know Your Electronic Voting Machine PDF . Archived PDF from the original on 2011-06-05 . Retrieved 2010-09-01 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Aam Aadmi Party proved in voting machines in the assembly . ManoramaOnline . Archived from the original on 2017-12-22 . Retrieved 2017-12-19 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Supreme Court Count VVPAT slips of 5 booths in each assembly seat  India News  Times of India . The Times of India .  SC Directs ECI To Increase VVPAT Verification From One EVM To Five EVMs Per Constituency . 8 April 2019.  When the SC Says No for Software Audit Review of EVMs  VVPAT at Present . Moneylife NEWS  VIEWS .  Arizona Democratic Party Selects Votation.com to Hold Worlds First Legally-Binding Public Election Over the Internet. - Free Online Library . www.thefreelibrary.com . Retrieved 2017-12-19 .  How online voting works . usatoday.com . 10 March 2000.  Alvarez, R. Michael Hall, Thad E. Trechsel, Alexander H. 2009-07-01. Internet Voting in Comparative Perspective The Case of Estonia. PS Political Science  Politics . 42 3 497505. doi  10.1017S1049096509090787 . ISSN   1537-5935 .  Doug Gross 8 November 2011. Why cant Americans vote online . CNN . Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Germann, Micha Serdlt, Uwe 2017-06-01. Internet voting and turnout Evidence from Switzerland. Electoral Studies . 47  112. doi  10.1016j.electstud.2017.03.001 .  a b Bochsler, Daniel May 26, 2010. Can Internet voting increase political participation PDF . Centre for the Study of Imperfection in Democracies . Archived PDF from the original on September 18, 2016. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   The Constitutionality of Electronic Voting in Germany . NDI - National Democratic Institute USA. Archived from the original on 25 March 2017 . Retrieved 31 May 2017 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Mellon, Jonathan Peixoto, Tiago Sjoberg, Fredrik M 2017-06-01. Does online voting change the outcome Evidence from a multi-mode public policy referendum. Electoral Studies . 47  1324. doi  10.1016j.electstud.2017.02.006 .  Mukunth, Vasudevan 10 May 2017. Ten Questions Worth Asking About EVM Tampering . The Wire. Archived from the original on 11 May 2017 . Retrieved 31 May 2017 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Krimmer, Robert Duenas-Cid, David Krivonosova, Iuliia Vinkel, Priit Koitmae, Arne 2018, Krimmer, Robert Volkamer, Melanie Cortier, Vronique Gor, Rajeev eds., How Much Does an e-Vote Cost Cost Comparison per Vote in Multichannel Elections in Estonia, Electronic Voting , Springer International Publishing, 11143 , pp.  117131, doi  10.1007978-3-030-00419-4_8 , ISBN   9783030004187  Springall, Drew Finkenauer, Travis Durumeric, Zakir Kitcat, Jason Hursti, Harri MacAlpine, Margaret Halderman, Alex, Security Analysis of the Estonian Internet Voting System , retrieved 3 December 2017  Friel, Brian November 2006 Let The Recounts Begin , National Journal Archived June 19, 2005, at the Wayback Machine  Government Accountability Office May 2004  Electronic Voting Offers Opportunities and Presents Challenges Archived 2016-03-03 at the Wayback Machine   Government Accountability Office September 2005  Federal Efforts to Improve Security and Reliability of Electronic Voting Systems Are Under Way, but Key Activities Need to Be Completed Archived 2016-02-09 at the Wayback Machine   Archived copy . Archived from the original on November 20, 2015 . Retrieved June 2, 2016 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  CS1 maint archived copy as title  link    Protecting the Integrity and Accessibility of Voting in 2004 and Beyond . People for the American Way Archived December 12, 2004, at the Wayback Machine  1 Archived August 10, 2007, at the Wayback Machine  Ballot Templates. Archived 2012-08-29 at the Wayback Machine tactile ballots International Foundation for Election Systems  Juels, Ari Dario Catalano Markus Jakobsson November 2002. Coercion-Resistant Electronic Elections . Cryptology ePrint Archive 165. Archived from the original on 7 April 2014 . Retrieved 2 May 2012 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Chaum, David Peter Y. A. Ryan Steve Schneider 2005. A Practical Voter-Verifiable Election Scheme. ESORICS05 10th European Symposium on Research in Computer Security . LNCS. 3679  118139.  Kremer, Steve Mark Ryan Ben Smyth 2010. Election verifiability in electronic voting protocols. ESORICS10 15th European Symposium on Research in Computer Security . 6345  389404.  ORG Election Report highlights problems with voting technology used . Openrightsgroup.org. Archived from the original on 2009-02-24 . Retrieved 2010-05-24 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Open Rights Group - ORG verdict on London Elections Insufficient evidence to declare confidence in results . Open Rights Group . Archived from the original on 2009-04-22. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Ruling of the Second Senate of the Federal Constitutional Court of Germany, 3 March 2009 . Bundesverfassungsgericht.de. Archived from the original on 11 July 2011 . Retrieved 2010-05-24 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   German Federal Constitutional Court, Press release no. 192009 of 3 March 2009 . Bundesverfassungsgericht.de. Archived from the original on 4 April 2009 . Retrieved 2010-05-24 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   a b Gurchetan S Grewal, Mark D Ryan, Sergiu Bursuc, Peter Y A Ryan. Caveat Coercitor coercion-evidence in electronic voting. 34th IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, 2013  Caveat Coercitor coercion-evidence in electronic voting Archived 2016-03-03 at the Wayback Machine , 2013 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy  Draft white paper on VVPR PDF . Archived from the original PDF on November 28, 2009 . Retrieved 2010-05-24 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   2 Archived February 2, 2007, at the Wayback Machine  apleasant 2013-11-25. E-voting Audits in Venezuela . www.ndi.org . Archived from the original on 2017-02-14 . Retrieved 2017-02-13 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Pilot Study of the Scantegrity II Voting System Planned for the 2009 Takoma Park City Election PDF . Archived from the original PDF on July 19, 2011. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Hardesty, Larry. Cryptographic voting debuts . MIT news . Archived PDF from the original on 2011-07-19 . Retrieved 2009-11-30 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Paper trail voting system used in Nevada Archived 2009-02-23 at the Wayback Machine , Associated Press Sept. 7, 2004  Nevada improves odds with e-vote Archived 2016-03-03 at the Wayback Machine , CNN October 29, 2004  NedapGroenendaal ES3B voting computer a security analysis chapter 7.1 PDF . Archived PDF from the original on 2010-01-07 . Retrieved 2010-05-24 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Defeating Existing Tamper-Indicating Seals . Argonne National Laboratory . Archived from the original on 2008-10-07. Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   The Problem with Electronic Voting Machines . Schneier.com. Archived from the original on 2010-02-08 . Retrieved 2010-05-24 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   The electronic voting and counting system . Elections.act.gov.au. Archived from the original on February 18, 2011 . Retrieved 2010-05-24 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Di Franco, A., Petro, A., Shear, E., and Vladimirov, V. 2004. Small vote manipulations can swing elections. Commun. ACM 47, 10 Oct. 2004, 4345. DOI httpdoi.acm.org10.11451022594.1022621  Rubin, Avi 2002. Security Considerations for Remote Electronic Voting over the Internet . Communications Policy and Information Technology Promises, Problems, Prospects . MIT Press. p.  105. ISBN   978-0-262-03300-8 . Archived from the original on 2018-05-10. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Ron McCallum, Participating in Political and Public life 2011 32 AltLJ 80. Archived copy . Archived from the original on 2016-01-06 . Retrieved 2016-02-08 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  CS1 maint archived copy as title  link   E-lected 2014-05-28. E-voting scores another triumph in Belgium . e-lected blog a view on electronic voting around the world . Archived from the original on 2017-02-14 . Retrieved 2017-02-13 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   e-Democracy entrepreneur Online voting will boom in coming years   . EurActiv.com . Archived from the original on 2016-11-19 . Retrieved 2017-02-13 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Canada, Elections. A Comparative Assessment of Electronic Voting . Archived from the original on 2017-02-14 . Retrieved 2017-02-13 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   BBC NEWS  Europe  Estonia forges ahead with e-vote . news.bbc.co.uk . Archived from the original on 2017-03-17 . Retrieved 2017-01-29 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   i-Voting - e-Estonia . e-estonia.com . Archived from the original on 2017-02-11 . Retrieved 2017-01-29 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Kobie, Nicole 2015-03-30. Why electronic voting isnt secure  but may be safe enough . The Guardian . ISSN   0261-3077 . Archived from the original on 2017-03-08 . Retrieved 2017-02-13 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Forum, Forbes Leadership. Venezuelas Election System Holds Up As A Model For The World . Forbes . Archived from the original on 2017-02-14 . Retrieved 2017-02-13 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   News, ABS-CBN. US, EU hail democratic milestone of Philippine polls . ABS-CBN News . Archived from the original on 2016-03-10 . Retrieved 2017-02-13 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Brazilian Superior Electoral Court. Electronic voting . Archived from the original on 2012-07-21. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Statistics - Internet Voting - Voting methods in Estonia - Estonian National Electoral Committee . Archived from the original on 9 April 2017 . Retrieved 1 April 2017 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Verifiable Internet Voting in Estonia httpresearch.cyber.eejanpublmobileverification-ie Archived 2014-12-09 at the Wayback Machine  All Questions About EVMs Are Answered Here . News18 .  Vishnoi, Anubhuti March 6, 2017. Election Commission plans to replace all pre-2006 EVMs with advanced M3 machines  via The Economic Times.  Zero Complaints Came Up After Lok Sabha Polls, Claims Expert Behind EVMs . NDTV.com .  Reporters, F. M. T. 28 October 2018. Problem with e-voting system Kuala Selangor PKR polls postponed . freemalaysiatoday.com .  Rahim, Rahimy. Azmin PKR party polls rife with problems, fair investigation needed - Nation - The Star Online . www.thestar.com.my .  a b Electronic Transmission of Ballots . 27 September 2016.  Astronauts beam votes home . CNN . 2 November 2010. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   James, Kate 2 November 2010. Astronauts Cast Vote From Space Thanks to 1997 Texas Law . Gather.com . Archived from the original on 11 May 2011 . Retrieved 2 November 2010 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Michael Safi. NSW election result could be challenged over iVote security flaw . The Guardian . Archived from the original on 2016-11-24. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Electronic Voting Random Spontaneous Bit Inversion Explained . Archived from the original on 2007-09-27 . Retrieved 2019-05-12 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   Mulcair handed NDP reins Successor to Layton faces big challenges. Calgary Herald , March 25, 2012.  How e-voting is taking over Ontario municipal elections . TVOntario , October 8, 2018.  Bandwidth glitch delays Sudburys municipal election . Sudbury Star , October 23, 2018.  Technical problems force many Ontario municipalities to extend voting . CTV News , October 23, 2018.  Was Election 2009 rigged - Rediff.com India News . Ia.rediff.com. 2009-07-04. Archived from the original on 2013-12-03 . Retrieved 2014-02-06 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   KHO Kuntavaalit uusiksi Vihdiss, Karkkilassa ja Kauniaisissa Brax will not resign because of the mess with voting . YLE Uutiset, Talous ja politiikka in Finnish. YLE. 2009-04-09. Archived from the original on April 12, 2009 . Retrieved 2009-04-09 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Shkisen nestyksen kehittmist ei jatketa nykyiselt pohjalta The development of e-voting will not be continued on the current basis  in Finnish. Valtioneuvosto Finnish Government. 2010-01-08. Archived from the original on 22 February 2014 . Retrieved 26 February 2017 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   Ministerie van Binnenlandse Zaken en Koninkrijksrelaties  Rijksoverheid.nl PDF . Minbzk.nl. Archived from the original PDF on March 25, 2009 . Retrieved 2014-02-06 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Wij vertrouwen stemcomputers niet in Dutch. Wijvertrouwenstemcomputersniet.nl. Archived from the original on 2008-12-16 . Retrieved 2010-05-24 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   English   Wij vertrouwen stemcomputers niet . Wijvertrouwenstemcomputersniet.nl. Archived from the original on 2010-07-26 . Retrieved 2010-05-24 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   AP via International Herald Tribune October 30, 2006 Dutch government scraps plans to use voting computers in 35 cities including Amsterdam  Dr. R. Mercuri 2002-09-11. Florida Primary 2002 Back to the Future . Notablesoftware.com. Archived from the original on 2011-01-03 . Retrieved 2010-05-24 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Cho, David Rein, Lisa November 18, 2003. Fairfax To Probe Voting Machines Washington Post, November 18, 2003 . Washingtonpost.com. Archived from the original on November 9, 2012 . Retrieved 2010-05-24 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Greg Lucas May 1, 2004. State bans electronic balloting in 4 counties Touch-screen firm accused of reprehensible, illegal conduct . San Francisco Chronicle . Archived from the original on February 21, 2009. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Hardy, Michael March 3, 2004. California nixes e-voting . Fcw.com. Archived from the original on March 7, 2016. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Diebold to Settle E-Voting Suit . Wired.com. Associated Press. November 10, 2004. Archived from the original on May 17, 2008 . Retrieved 2010-05-24 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   State of California Secretary of State February 17, 2006. Approval of use of Diebold Election Systems, Inc . Archived May 2, 2006, at the Wayback Machine  Kim, Zetter 2004-03-19. E-Vote Snafu in California County . Wired . Archived from the original on September 16, 2013. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Wheaton, Sarah. Voting Test Falls Victim to Hackers . The New York Times . Archived from the original on 2017-06-27 . Retrieved 2015-02-20 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   3  dead link   Hauser, Christine Holusha, John November 7, 2006. Problems lead 8 states to extend some voting hours . The New York Times . International Herald Tribune . Retrieved February 25, 2018 .  Thompson, Clive January 6, 2008. Can You Count on Voting Machines . The New York Times . Archived from the original on April 2, 2015 . Retrieved March 29, 2010 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   a b 4  dead link   2006 Congressional District 13 Race - Florida Division of Elections - Department of State . Election.dos.state.fl.us. Archived from the original on 2013-11-12 . Retrieved 2014-02-06 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Technology Review . Technology Review . Retrieved 2010-05-24 .  Grossman, Wendy M 30 April 2009. Why machines are bad at counting votes . London The Guardian. Archived from the original on 28 February 2014 . Retrieved 2009-07-14 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   CA SoS Top to Bottom Review Archived 2014-12-03 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved March 2, 2012  Simons, Barbara. August 13, 2007. California The Top to Bottom Review. Archived 2016-02-25 at the Wayback Machine The Voter. Retrieved November 27, 2007.  Riordan, Theresa. 13 September 2006. Archived copy . Archived from the original on 2016-03-04 . Retrieved 2016-02-08 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  CS1 maint archived copy as title  link  Princeton University. Retrieved March 6, 2008.  IGS Votomatic Prototype Goes to the Smithsonian . Institute of Governmental Studies, Public Affairs Report . University of California, Berkeley. 42 4. Winter 2001. Archived from the original  Scholar search  on July 13, 2007. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   January Magazine, The Fix Is In   . Januarymagazine.com . Retrieved 2010-05-24 .  Infantry Archive, The Collective Era   . freeinfantry.com . Archived from the original on 2017-01-03 . Retrieved 2016-09-21 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  External links  edit  Wikimedia Commons has media related to Voting machines . Electronic Vote around the World  Smartmatic Election Assistance Commission Vote.NIST.gov  The National Institute of Standards and Technology Help America Vote Act page. An Electronic Voting Case Study in KCA University, Kenya The Election Technology Library research list  A comprehensive list of research relating to technology use in elections. E-Voting information from ACE Project How do we vote in India. Electronic Voting Systems at Curlie NPR summary of current technology status in the states of the U.S., as of May 2008. Internet Voting in Estonia Progetto Salento eVoting A project for an e-voting test in Melpignano e Martignano Lecce   Italy designed by Prof. Marco Mancarella   University of Salento. Jard-Ced, Roger Pujol-Ahull, Jordi Castell-Roca, Jordi Viejo, Alexandre 2012. Study on Poll-Site Voting and Verification Systems. Computers  Security . 31 8 9891010. doi  10.1016j.cose.2012.08.001 . A review of existing electronic voting systems and its verification systems in supervised environments. Open Counting Systems Behind E-Voting VoteBoxtm UK Online Voting Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleElectronic_voting oldid913775617  Categories  Electronic voting Voting Hidden categories CS1 errors deprecated parameters Webarchive template wayback links Webarchive template other archives CS1 maint archived copy as title CS1 Finnish-language sources fi CS1 Dutch-language sources nl All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2008 Use American English from March 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Articles with short description Articles with limited geographic scope from October 2016 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2009 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from July 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2010 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from July 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2009 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Curlie links