Bachelor of Science in Information Technology From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search This article needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources   Bachelor of Science in Information Technology     news    newspapers    books    scholar    JSTOR  December 2012   Learn how and when to remove this template message  A Bachelor of Science in Information Technology , abbreviated BSIT or B.Sc IT , is a Bachelors degree awarded for an undergraduate course or program in the Information technology field. The degree is normally required in order to work in the Information technology industry. A Bachelor of Science in Information Technology degree program typically takes three to four years depending on the country. This degree is primarily focused on subjects such as software, databases, and networking. In general, computer science degrees tend to focus on the mathematical and theoretical foundations of computing rather than emphasizing specific technologies. The de gree is a Bachelor of Science degree with institutions conferring degrees in the fields of information technology and related fields. This degree is awarded for completing a program of study in the field of software development , software testing , software engineering , web design , databases , programming , computer networking and computer systems . Graduates with an information technology background are able to perform technology tasks relating to the processing, storing, and communication of information between computers, mobile phones, and other electronic devices. Information technology as a field emphasizes the secure management of large amounts of variable information and its accessibility via a wide variety of syste ms both local and worldwide. 1  Contents 1 Skills taught 2 International variations 2.1 Australia 2.2 Belgium 2.3 Bangladesh 2.4 Canada 2.5 Germany 2.6 India 2.7 Malaysia 2.8 Netherlands 2.9 Namibia 2.10 Nepal 2.11 Pakistan 2.12 Philippines 2.13 Portugal 2.14 Sri Lanka 2.15 United States 3 See also 4 References Skills taught  edit  Generally, software and information technology companies look for people who have strong programming skills, system analysis, and software testing skills. 2  Many colleges teach practical skills that are crucial to becoming a software developer. As logical reasoning and critical thinking are important in becoming a software professional, this degree encompasses the complete process of software development from software design and development to final testing. 3  Students who complete their undergraduate education in software engineering at a satisfactory level often pursue graduate studies such as a Master of Science in Information Technology M.Sc IT and sometimes continuing onto a doctoral program and earning a doctorate such as a Doctor of Information Technology DIT. International variations  edit  This article possibly contains original research . Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.  July 2019   Learn how and when to remove this template message  Australia  edit  In Australia , Bachelor of Information TechnologyScience BInfTech programs are three to four years in duration. Honors awarded to graduates who successfully complete a four-year program.  citation needed  Belgium  edit  In Belgium , the Bachelor of Science in Information Technology is a 3-year degree after the compulsory education, but outside the universities with specializing in certain fields, usually databases, network, realtime operating systems andor web design.  citation needed  Bangladesh  edit  In Bangladesh, the Bachelor of Engineering in Information Technology is awarded following a four-year course of study under the Dhaka University, Jahangirnagar University, Bangladesh University of Professionals, University of Information Technology and Sciences, 4  Stamford University Bangladesh and Royal University of Dhaka.  citation needed  Canada  edit  In Canada , the Bachelor of Science B.S. program in Information Technology IT with a minor in Business Administration offers an interdisciplinary curriculum focusing on both information technology and business administration. In addition, the program is unique in that it merges traditional academic topics with leading edge and current IT practices and technology. This program is offered under the written consent of the British Columbia Ministry of Advanced Education.  citation needed  Germany  edit  In Germany , Bachelor of Science in Information Technology integrates a professional degree in information technology with a major in another country or culture and its language, enhancing professional training and career options. The course is of three to five years duration. Students spend two semesters of study at a university or other higher education institution in the country of their major.  citation needed  The information technology component provides a sound education in all aspects of computing and information technology for a career in the profession.  citation needed  India  edit  In India , a Bachelor of Science in Information Technology BSc IT is a 3-year undergraduate program. The Bachelor of Information Science degree is a distinctly different from a general B. Sc. The Bachelor of Engineering in Information Technology, however is a 4-year program and the degree awarded is referred to as B.Tech or B.E.  citation needed  One can apply for BSc IT after completing HSC or after completing Engineering Diploma . 5  Malaysia  edit  In Malaysia Information Technology course is being studied for 6 or 7 semesters 3 or 3 12 years with specializing in certain field and by undergoing one semester 6 months of industrial training.  citation needed  Netherlands  edit  In the Netherlands , the Bachelor of Science in Information Technology degree is awarded after four years of study with specializing in a certain field.  citation needed  Namibia  edit  In Namibia , Bachelor of Science in Information Technology degrees are awarded after three and four years with specialization in areas such as Business Computing, System Administration  Networks as well as Software Development . The Polytechnic of Namibia , University of Namibia and other educational institutions in Namibia are key producers of graduates in this field.  citation needed  Nepal  edit  In Nepal , Bachelor of Science in Computer Science and Information Technology B.Sc.CSIT  is a four-year course of study. 6  The Bachelor of Computer Science and Information Technology is provided by Tribhuvan University and the degree awarded is referred to as BScCSIT.  citation needed  Pakistan  edit  In Pakistan , a Bachelor of Science in Information Technology BS-IT is 4-year program. Some universities also named as Bachelor of Engineering in Information Technology BE-IT.BEIT was started in Dr.A.Q Khan institute of Computer Sciences and Information TechnologyKICSIT from 2001 to 2013.Now it has been converted into BSIT.www.kicsit.edu.pk site for Visit.PUCIT is the only university whos ranked Whighestby HEC in BSIT among Pakistan universities.  citation needed  Philippines  edit  In the Philippines , BSIT program normally takes 4 years to complete. Schools with trimester system has less time to complete this course. A total number of 486 hours was set by the CHED during internships of the program. 7  Portugal  edit  In Portugal , the Bachelor of Science in Information Technology degree is awarded following a ten-year course of study without specialization.  citation needed  Sri Lanka  edit  In Sri Lanka , the Bachelor of Science in Information Technology B.Sc. IT is either a four-year degree with a specialization, called a major, with honors or a three-year degree without any specialization, called a general degree. University of Colombo has offered Bachelor of Science in Information and Communication Technology and later it was changed as Bachelor of Science in Information Systems . University of Moratuwa and Sri Lanka Institute of Information Technology also offers IT degrees.  citation needed  University of Moratuwa gives B.Sc.Hons Information Technology 4-year degree.Sri Lankas first IT faculty was in University of Moratuwa .  citation needed  Bachelor of Science in Information and Communication Technology Special degree program was newly started at Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences FHSS at University of Sri Jayewardenepura . University of Kelaniya offers Bachelor of Science in Management and Information Technology with IT specialization.  citation needed  United States  edit  In the United States , a B.S. in Information Technology is awarded after a four-year course of study. Some degree programs are accredited by the Computing Accreditation Commission of the Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology  ABET . 8  9  See also  edit  Computer Science portal Bachelor of Computing Bachelor of Information Technology Bachelor of Computer Science Bachelor of Software Engineering Bachelor of Computer Information Systems References  edit   Network and Computer Systems Administrators . Occupational Outlook Handbook . United States Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2012-03-29 . Retrieved 2013-12-01 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Computer and Inform .  Bachelor of Science in Information Technology   Fairleigh Dickinson University . View.fdu.edu 2006-05-08. Retrieved on 2013-10-05.  Departments Bachelor of Science in Information Technology . uits.edu.bd .  BSc IT Eligibility .  Course Description Bachelor of Science in Computer Science and Information Technology . oic.edu.np . Retrieved 2018-03-27 .  httpwww.finduniversity.phmajorsbs-in-information-technology-philippines  Criteria for Accrediting Computing Programs, 2014-2015 . Accreditation Criteria and Supporting Documents . ABET. 2013-10-26 . Retrieved 2013-12-01 .  High Growth Industry Profile - Information Technology . Doleta.gov. Retrieved on 2013-10-05. v t e Levels of academic degree Undergraduate ISCED level 5 Associate degree Foundation degree Higher National Diploma   Diploma of Higher Education   Certificate of Higher Education ISCED level 6 Bachelors degree Honours degree Postgraduate ISCED level 7 Masters degree Postgraduate diploma   certificate Diplom degree Engineers degree ISCED level 8 Doctorate Candidate of Sciences Other Postdoctoral Higher doctorate Doktor nauk Habilitation Docent Tenure Fellow No dominant classification Laurea Licentiate Magister degree Professional degree Graduate diploma   certificate Higher diploma Specialist degree   diploma Terminal degree Unearned Honorary degree Ad eundem degree Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleBachelor_of_Science_in_Information_Technology oldid905603452  Categories  Bachelors degrees Computer science education Information technology qualifications Hidden categories Articles needing additional references from December 2012 All articles needing additional references Articles that may contain original research from July 2019 All articles that may contain original research All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2019