Operations research From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search For the academic journal, see Operations Research . Operations research  British English  operational research   OR  is a discipline that deals with the application of advanced analytical methods to help make better decisions. 1  Further, the term operational analysis is used in the British and some British Commonwealth military as an intrinsic part of capability development, management and assurance. In particular, operational analysis forms part of the Combined Operational Effectiveness and Investment Appraisals, which support British defense capability acquisition decision-making. It is often considered to be a sub-field of applied mathematics . 2  The terms management science and decision science are sometimes used as synonyms. 3  Employing techniques from other mathematical sciences, such as mathematical modeling , statistical analysis , and mathematical optimization , operations research arrives at optimal or near-optimal solutions to complex decision-making problems. Because of its emphasis on human-technology interaction and because of its focus on practical applications, operations research has overlap with other disciplines, notably industrial engineering and operations management , and draws on psychology and organization science . Operations research is often concerned with determining the extreme values of some real-world objective the maximum of profit, performance, or yield or minimum of loss, risk, or cost. Originating in military efforts before World War II, its techniques have grown to concern problems in a variety of industries. 4  Contents 1 Overview 2 History 2.1 Historical origins 2.2 Second World War 2.3 After World War II 3 Problems addressed 4 Management science 4.1 Related fields 4.2 Applications 5 Societies and journals 5.1 Societies 5.2 Journals of INFORMS 5.3 Other journals 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 8.1 Classic books and articles 8.2 Classic textbooks 8.3 History 9 External links Overview  edit  Operational research OR encompasses a wide range of problem-solving techniques and methods applied in the pursuit of improved decision-making and efficiency, such as simulation , mathematical optimization , queueing theory and other stochastic-process models, Markov decision processes , econometric methods , data envelopment analysis , neural networks , expert systems , decision analysis , and the analytic hierarchy process . 5  Nearly all of these techniques involve the construction of mathematical models that attempt to describe the system. Because of the computational and statistical nature of most of these fields, OR also has strong ties to computer science and analytics . Operational researchers faced with a new problem must determine which of these techniques are most appropriate given the nature of the system, the goals for improvement, and constraints on time and computing power. The major sub-disciplines in modern operational research, as identified by the journal Operations Research , 6  are Computing and information technologies Financial engineering Manufacturing , service sciences , and supply chain management Policy modeling and public sector work Revenue management Simulation Stochastic models Transportation History  edit  In the decades after the two world wars, the tools of operations research were more widely applied to problems in business, industry and society. Since that time, operational research has expanded into a field widely used in industries ranging from petrochemicals to airlines, finance, logistics, and government, moving to a focus on the development of mathematical models that ca n be used to analyse and optimize complex systems, and has become an area of active academic and industrial research. 4  Historical origins  edit  In the 17th century, mathematicians like Christiaan Huygens and Blaise Pascal  problem of points  tried to solve problems involving complex decisions with probability . Others in the 18th and 19th centuries solved these types of problems with combinatorics . Charles Babbage s research into the cost of transportation and sorting of mail led to Englands universal Penny Post in 1840, and studies into the dynamical behaviour of railway vehicles in defence of the GWR s broad gauge. 7  Beginning in the 20th century, study of inventory management could be considered the origin of modern operations research with economic order quantity developed by Ford W. Harris in 1913. Operational research may have originated in the efforts of military planners during World War I convoy theory and Lanchesters laws . Percy Bridgman brought operational research to bear on problems in physics in the 1920s and would later attempt to extend these to the social sciences. 8  Modern operational research originated at the Bawdsey Research Station in the UK in 1937 and was the result of an initiative of the stations superintendent, A. P. Rowe . Rowe conceived the idea as a means to analyse and improve the working of the UKs early warning radar system, Chain Home CH. Initially, he analysed the operating of the radar equipment and its communication networks, expanding later to include the operating personnels behaviour. This revealed unappreciated limitations of the CH network and allowed remedial action to be taken. 9  Scientists in the United Kingdom including Patrick Blackett later Lord Blackett OM PRS, Cecil Gordon , Solly Zuckerman , later Baron Zuckerman OM, KCB, FRS, C. H. Waddington , Owen Wansbrough-Jones , Frank Yates , Jacob Bronowski and Freeman Dyson , and in the United States with George Dantzig looked for ways to make better decisions in such areas as logistics and training schedules Second World War  edit  The modern field of operational research arose during World War II.  dubious  discuss  In the World War II era, operational research was defined as a scientific method of providing executive departments with a quantitative basis for decisions regarding the operations under their control. 10  Other names for it included operational analysis UK Ministry of Defence from 1962 11  and quantitative management. 12  During the Second World War close to 1,000 men and women in Britain were engaged in operational research. About 200 operational research scientists worked for the British Army . 13  Patrick Blackett worked for several different organizations during the war. Early in the war while working for the Royal Aircraft Establishment RAE he set up a team known as the Circus which helped to reduce the number of anti-aircraft artillery rounds needed to shoot down an enemy aircraft from an average of over 20,000 at the start of the Battle of Britain to 4,000 in 1941. 14  A Liberator in standard RAF greendark earthblack night bomber finish as originally used by Coastal Command In 1941, Blackett moved from the RAE to the Navy, after first working with RAF Coastal Command , in 1941 and then early in 1942 to the Admiralty . 15  Blacketts team at Coastal Commands Operational Research Section CC-ORS included two future Nobel prize winners and many other people who went on to be pre-eminent in their fields. 16  They undertook a number of crucial analyses that aided the war effort. Britain introduced the convoy system to reduce shipping losses, but while the principle of using warships to accompany merchant ships was generally accepted, it was unclear whether it was better for convoys to be small or large. Convoys travel at the speed of the slowest member, so small convoys can travel faster. It was also argued that small convoys would be harder for German U-boats to detect. On the other hand, large convoys could deploy more warships against an attacker. Blacketts staff showed that the losses suffered by convoys depended largely on the number of escort vessels present, rather than the size of the convoy. Their conclusion was that a few large convoys are more defensible than many small ones. 17  While performing an analysis of the methods used by RAF Coastal Command to hunt and destroy submarines, one of the analysts asked what colour the aircraft were. As most of them were from Bomber Command they were painted black for night-time operations. At the suggestion of CC-ORS a test was run to see if that was the best colour to camouflage the aircraft for daytime operations in the grey North Atlantic skies. Tests showed that aircraft painted w hite were on average not spotted until they were 20 closer than those painted black. This change indicated that 30 more submarines would be attacked and sunk for the same number of sightings. 18  As a result of these findings Coastal Command changed their aircraft to using white undersurfaces. Other work by the CC-ORS indicated that on average if the trigger depth of aerial-delivered depth charges DCs were changed from 100 feet to 25 feet, the kill ratios would go up. The reason was that if a U-boat saw an aircraft only shortly before it arrived over the target then at 100 feet the charges would do no damage because the U-boat wouldnt have had time to descend as far as 100 feet, and if it saw the aircraft a long way from the target it had time to alter course under water so the chances of it being within the 20-foot kill zone of the charges was small. It was more efficient to attack those submarines close to the surface when the targets locations were better known than to attempt their destruction at greater depths when their positions could only be guessed. Before the change of settings from 100 feet to 25 feet, 1 of submerged U-boats were sunk and 14 damaged. After the change, 7 were sunk and 11 damaged if submarines were caught on the surface but had time to submerge just before being attacked, the numbers rose to 11 sunk and 15 damaged. Blackett observed there can be few cases where such a great operational gain had been obtained by such a small and simple change of tactics. 19  Map of Kammhuber Line Bomber Commands Operational Research Section BC-ORS, analyzed a report of a survey carried out by RAF Bomber Command .  citation needed  For the survey, Bomber Command inspected all bombers returning from bombing raids over Germany over a particular period. All damage inflicted by German air defences was noted and the recommendation was given that armour be added in the most heavily damaged areas. This recommendation was not adopted because the fact that the aircraft were able to return with these areas damaged indicated the areas were not vital, and adding armour to non-vital areas where damage is acceptable reduces aircraft performance. Their suggestion to remove some of the crew so that an aircraft loss would result in fewer personnel losses, was also rejected by RAF command. Blacketts team made the logical recommendation that the armour be placed in the areas which were completely untouched by damage in the bombers which returned. They reasoned that the survey was biased, since it only included aircraft that returned to Britain. The areas u ntouched in returning aircraft were probably vital areas, which, if hit, would result in the loss of the aircraft. 20  This story has been disputed, 21  with a similar damage assessment study completed in the US by the Statistical Research Group at Columbia University, 22  the result of work done by Abraham Wald 23  . When Germany organized its air defences into the Kammhuber Line , it was realized by the British that if the RAF bombers were to fly in a bomber stream they could overwhelm the night fighters who flew in individual cells directed to their targets by ground controllers. It was then a matter of calculating the statistical loss from collisions against the statistical loss from night fighters to calculate how close the bombers should fly to minimize RAF losses. 24  The exchange rate ratio of output to input was a characteristic feature of operational research. By comparing the number of flying hours put in by Allied aircraft to the number of U-boat sightings in a given area, it was possible to redistribute aircraft to more productive patrol areas. Comparison of exchange rates established effectiveness ratios useful in planning. The ra tio of 60 mines laid per ship sunk was common to several campaigns German mines in British ports, British mines on German routes, and United States mines in Japanese routes. 25  Operational research doubled the on-target bomb rate of B-29s bombing Japan from the Marianas Islands by increasing the training ratio from 4 to 10 percent of flying hours revealed that wolf-packs of three United States submarines were the most effective number to enable all members of the pack to engage targets discovered on their individual patrol stations revealed that glossy enamel paint was more effective camouflage for night fighters than traditional dull camouflage pa int finish, and a smooth paint finish increased airspeed by reducing skin friction. 25  On land, the operational research sections of the Army Operational Research Group AORG of the Ministry of Supply MoS were landed in Normandy in 1944 , and they followed British forces in the advance across Europe. They analyzed, among other topics, the effectiveness of artillery, aerial bombing and anti-tank shooting. After World War II  edit  This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .  March 2010  With expanded techniques and growing awareness of the field at the close of the war, operational research was no longer limited to only operational, but was extended to encompass equipment procurement, training, logistics and infrastructure. Operations Research also grew in many areas other than the military once scientists learned to apply its principles to the civilian sector . With the development of the simplex algorithm for linear programming in 1947 26  and the development of computers over the next three decades, Operations Research can now solve problems with hundreds of thousands of variables and constraints. Moreover, the large volumes of data required for such problems can be stored and manipulated very efficiently. 26  Much of operations research modernly known as analytics relies upon stochastic variables and a therefore access to truly random numbers. Fortunately the cybernetics field also required the same level of randomness. The development of increasingly better random number generators has been a boon to both disciplines. Modern applications of operations research include city pla nning, football strategies, emergency planning, optimizing all facets of industry and economy, and undoubtfully with the likelihood of the inclusion of terrorist attack planning and definitely counter-terrorist attack planning. A link to futures research should also be included here. Problems addressed  edit  Critical path analysis or project planning  identifying those processes in a complex project which affect the overall duration of the project Floorplanning  designing the layout of equipment in a factory or components on a computer chip to reduce manufacturing time therefore reducing cost Network optimization  for instance, setup of telecommunications or power system networks to maintain quality of service during outages Allocation problems Facility location Assignment Problems Assignment problem Generalized assignment problem Quadratic assignment problem Weapon target assignment problem Bayesian search theory  looking for a target Optimal search Routing , such as determining the routes of buses so that as few buses are needed as possible Supply chain management  managing the flow of raw materials and products based on uncertain demand for the finished products Project production activities managing the flow of work activities in a capital project in response to system variability through operations research tools for variability reduction and buffer allocation using a combination of allocation of capacity, inventory and time 27  28  Efficient messaging and customer response tactics Automation  automating or integrating robotic systems in human-driven operations processes Globalization  globalizing operations processes in order to take advantage of cheaper materials, labor, land or other productivity inputs Transportation managing freight transportation and delivery systems Examples LTL shipping , intermodal freight transport , travelling salesman problem  Scheduling  Personnel staffing Manufacturing steps Project tasks Network data traffic these are known as queueing models or queueing systems. Sports events and their television coverage Blending of raw materials in oil refineries Determining optimal prices, in many retail and B2B settings, within the disciplines of pricing science Cutting stock problem  Cutting small items out of bigger ones. Operational research is also used extensively in government where evidence-based policy is used. Management science  edit  Main article Management science In 1967 Stafford Beer characterized the field of management science as the business use of operations research. 29  However, in modern times the term management science may also be used to refer to the separate fields of organizational studies or corporate strategy .  citation needed  Like operational research itself, management science MS is an interdisciplinary branch of applied mathematics devoted to optimal decision planning, with strong links with economics, business, engineering, and other sciences . It uses various scientific research -based principles, strategies , and analytical methods including mathematical modeling , statistics and numerical algorithms to improve an organizations ability to enact rational and meaningful management decisions by arriving at optimal or near optimal solutions to complex decision problems. Management scientists help businesses to achieve their goals using the scientific methods of operational research. The management scientists mandate is to use rational, systematic, science-based techniques to inform and improve decisions of all kinds. Of course, the techniques of management science are not restricted to business applications but may be applied to military, medical, public administration, charitable groups, political groups or community groups. Management science is concerned with developing and applying models and concepts that may prove useful in helping to illuminate management issues and solve managerial problems, as well as designing and developing new and better models of organizational excellence. 30  The application of these models within the corporate sector became known as management science. 31  Related fields  edit  Some of the fields that have considerable overlap with Operations Research and Management Science include 32   Business analytics Computer science Data mining  Data science  Big data Decision analysis Decision intelligence Engineering Financial engineering Forecasting Game theory Geography  Geographic information science Graph theory Industrial engineering Logistics Mathematical modeling Mathematical optimization Probability and statistics Project management Policy analysis Simulation Social network  Transportation forecasting models Stochastic processes Supply chain management Systems engineering Applications  edit  Applications are abundant such as in airlines, manufacturing companies, service organizations , military branches, and government. The range of problems and issues to which it has contributed insights and solutions is vast. It includes 30  Scheduling of airlines, trains, buses etc. Assignment assigning crew to flights, trains or buses employees to projects commitment and dispatch of power generation facilities Facility location deciding most appropriate location for new facilities such as warehouse factory or fire station Hydraulics  Piping Engineering managing flow of water from reservoirs Health Services information and supply chain management Game Theory identifying, understanding developing strategies adopted by companies Urban Design Computer Network Engineering packet routing timing analysis Telecom  Data Communication Engineering packet routing timing analysis 33  Management is also concerned with so-called soft-operational analysis which concerns methods for strategic planning , strategic decision support , problem structuring methods . In dealing with these sorts of challenges, mathematical modeling and simulation may not be appropriate or may not suffice. Therefore, during the past 30 years  vague  , a number of non-quantified modeling methods have been developed. These include  citation needed  stakeholder based approaches including metagame analysis and drama theory morphological analysis and various forms of influence diagrams cognitive mapping strategic choice robustness analysis Societies and journals  edit  Societies  edit  The International Federation of Operational Research Societies IFORS 34  is an umbrella organization for operational research societies worldwide, representing approximately 50 national societies including those in the US, 35  UK , 36  France, 37  Germany, Italy , 38  Canada, 39  Australia, 40  New Zealand, 41  Philippines, 42  India, 43  Japan and South Africa. 44  The constituent members of IFORS form regional groups, such as that in Europe, the Association of European Operational Research Societies EURO. 45  Other important operational research organizations are Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization SISO 46  and InterserviceIndustry Training, Simulation and Education Conference IITSEC 47  In 2004 the US-based organization INFORMS began an initiative to market the OR profession better, including a website entitled The Science of Better 48  which provides an introduction to OR and examples of successful applications of OR to industrial problems. This initiative has been adopted by the Operational Research Society in the UK, including a website entitled Learn about OR . 49  Journals of INFORMS  edit  The Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences INFORMS publishes thirteen scholarly journals about operations research, including the top two journals in their class, according to 2005 Journal Citation Reports . 50  They are Decision Analysis 51  Information Systems Research 52  INFORMS Journal on Computing 53  INFORMS Transactions on Education 54  an open access journal Interfaces 55  Management Science Manufacturing  Service Operations Management Marketing Science Mathematics of Operations Research Operations Research Organization Science 56  Service Science 57  Transportation Science Other journals  edit  These are listed in alphabetical order of their titles. 4OR -A Quarterly Journal of Operations Research  jointly published the Belgian, French and Italian Operations Research Societies Springer Decision Sciences published by Wiley-Blackwell on behalf of the Decision Sciences Institute European Journal of Operational Research EJOR  Founded in 1975 and is presently  when  by far the largest operational research journal in the world, with its around 9,000 pages of published papers per year. In 2004, its total number of citations was the second largest amongst Operational Research and Management Science journals INFOR Journal  published and sponsored by the Canadian Operational Research Society International Journal of Operations Research and Information Systems IJORIS an official publication of the Information Resources Management Association, published quarterly by IGI Global 58  Journal of Defense Modeling and Simulation JDMS Applications, Methodology, Technology  a quarterly journal devoted to advancing the science of modeling and simulation as it relates to the military and defense. 59  Journal of the Operational Research Society JORS  an official journal of The OR Society  this is the oldest continuously published journal of OR in the world, published by Taylor  Francis  Military Operations Research MOR  published by the Military Operations Research Society  Omega - The International Journal of Management Science  Operations Research Letters  Opsearch  official journal of the Operational Research Society of India OR Insight  a quarterly journal of The OR Society, published by Palgrave 60  Production and Operations Management , the official journal of the Production and Operations Management Society TOP  the official journal of the Spanish Statistics and Operations Research Society . 61  See also  edit  Operations research topics Black box analysis Dynamic programming Inventory theory Optimal maintenance Real options valuation Operations researchers Operations researchers category George Dantzig Leonid Kantorovich Tjalling Koopmans Russell L. Ackoff Stafford Beer Alfred Blumstein C. West Churchman William W. Cooper Robert Dorfman Richard M. Karp Ramayya Krishnan Frederick W. Lanchester Thomas L. Magnanti Alvin E. Roth Peter Whittle Related fields Behavioral operations research Big data Business engineering Business process management Database normalization Engineering management Geographic information systems Industrial engineering Industrial organization Managerial economics Military simulation Power system simulation Project Production Management Reliability engineering Scientific management Search-based software engineering Simulation modeling System safety Wargaming References  edit   What is O.R. . INFORMS.org . Retrieved 7 January 2012 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Mathematics Subject Classification . American Mathematical Society. 23 May 2011 . Retrieved 7 January 2012 .  Wetherbe, James C. 1979, Systems analysis for computer-based information systems , West series in data processing and information systems, West Pub. Co., ISBN   9780829902280 , A systems analyst who contributes in the area of DSS must be skilled in such areas as management science synonymous with decision science and operation research, modeling, simulation, and advanced statistics.  a b What is OR . HSOR.org . Retrieved 13 November 2011 .  Operations Research Analysts . Bls.gov . Retrieved 27 January 2012 .  OR  Pubs  IOL Home . INFORMS.org. 2 January 2009. Archived from the original on 27 May 2009 . Retrieved 13 November 2011 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   M.S. Sodhi, What about the O in O.R. ORMS Today, December, 2007, p. 12, httpwww.lionhrtpub.comormsorms-12-07frqed.html  P. W. Bridgman, The Logic of Modern Physics, The MacMillan Company, New York, 1927  operations research industrial engineering   History  Britannica Online Encyclopedia . Britannica.com . Retrieved 13 November 2011 .  Operational Research in the British Army 19391945, October 1947, Report C673448, UK National Archives file WO2911301 Quoted on the dust-jacket of Morse, Philip M, and Kimball, George E, Methods of Operation Research , 1st edition revised, MIT Press  J Wiley, 5th printing, 1954.  UK National Archives Catalogue for WO291 lists a War Office organisation called Army Operational Research Group AORG that existed from 1946 to 1962. In January 1962 the name was changed to Army Operational Research Establishment AORE. Following the creation of a unified Ministry of Defence, a tri-service operational research organisation was established the Defence Operational Research Establishment DOAE which was formed in 1965, and it the Army Operational Research Establishment based at West Byfleet.  httpbrochure.unisa.ac.zamyunisadatasubjectsQuantitative20Management.pdf  Kirby, p. 117 Archived 27 August 2013 at the Wayback Machine  Kirby, pp. 9194 Archived 27 August 2013 at the Wayback Machine  Kirby, p. 96,109 Archived 2 October 2013 at the Wayback Machine  Kirby, p. 96 Archived 27 March 2014 at the Wayback Machine    Numbers are Essential Victory in the North Atlantic Reconsidered, MarchMay 1943 . Familyheritage.ca. 24 May 1943 . Retrieved 13 November 2011 .  Kirby, p. 101  Kirby, pp. 102,103   James F. Dunnigan 1999. Dirty Little Secrets of the Twentieth Century . Harper Paperbacks . pp.  215217.  httplesswrong.comlwbbvexamine_your_assumptions  Wallis, W. Allen 1980. The Statistical Research Group, 19421945. Journal of the American Statistical Association . 75 370 320330. doi  10.108001621459.1980.10477469 .  Mangel, Marc Samaniego, Francisco J 1984. Abraham Walds Work on Aircraft Survivability. Journal of the American Statistical Association . 79 386 259. doi  10.23072288257 . JSTOR   2288257 .  RAF History  Bomber Command 60th Anniversary . Raf.mod.uk . Retrieved 13 November 2011 .  a b Milkman, Raymond H. May 1968. Operation Research in World War II. United States Naval Institute Proceedings. Cite journal requires journal  help   a b 1.2 A HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE. PRINCIPLES AND APPLICATIONS OF OPERATIONS RESEARCH .  Factory Physics for Managers, E. S. Pound, J. H. Bell, and M. L. Spearman, McGraw-Hill, 2014, p 47  New Era of Project Delivery  Project as Production System, R. G. Shenoy and T. R. Zabelle, Journal of Project Production Management, Vol 1, pp Nov 2016, pp 13-24 httpswww.researchgate.netpublication312602707_New_Era_of_Project_Delivery_-_Project_as_Production_System  Stafford Beer 1967 Management Science The Business Use of Operations Research  a b What is Management Science Archived 14 September 2008 at the Wayback Machine Lancaster University, 2008. Retrieved 5 June 2008.  What is Management Science The University of Tennessee, 2006. Retrieved 5 June 2008.  Merig, Jos M Yang, Jian-Bo 2017. A bibliometric analysis of operations research and management science . Omega - International Journal of Management Science . 73  3748. doi  10.1016j.omega.2016.12.004 . ISSN   0305-0483 .  httpnak-architecture.comindex.phpenservicesblog55-urban-operations-research-uor  IFORS . IFORS . Retrieved 13 November 2011 .  Leszczynski, Mary 8 November 2011. Informs . Informs . Retrieved 13 November 2011 .  The OR Society . Orsoc.org.uk. Archived from the original on 24 April 2006 . Retrieved 13 November 2011 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Socit franaise de Recherche Oprationnelle et dAide  la Dcision . ROADEF . Retrieved 13 November 2011 .  www.airo.org. AIRO . airo.org . Retrieved 31 March 2018 .  www.cors.ca. CORS . Cors.ca . Retrieved 13 November 2011 .  ASOR . ASOR. 1 January 1972 . Retrieved 13 November 2011 .  ORSNZ . ORSNZ . Retrieved 13 November 2011 .  ORSP . ORSP . Retrieved 13 November 2011 .  ORSI . Orsi.in . Retrieved 13 November 2011 .  ORSSA . ORSSA. 23 September 2011 . Retrieved 13 November 2011 .  EURO EURO . Euro-online.org . Retrieved 13 November 2011 .  SISO . Sisostds.org . Retrieved 13 November 2011 .  IItsec . IItsec . Retrieved 13 November 2011 .  The Science of Better . The Science of Better . Retrieved 13 November 2011 .  Learn about OR . Learn about OR . Retrieved 13 November 2011 .  INFORMS Journals . Informs.org . Retrieved 13 November 2011 .  Decision Analysis . Informs.org . Retrieved 19 March 2015 .  Information Systems Research . Informs.org . Retrieved 19 March 2015 .  INFORMS Journal on Computing . Informs.org . Retrieved 19 March 2015 .  INFORMS Transactions on Education . Informs.org . Retrieved 19 March 2015 .  Interfaces . Informs.org . Retrieved 19 March 2015 .  Organization Science . Informs.org . Retrieved 19 March 2015 .  Service Science . Informs.org . Retrieved 19 March 2015 .  International Journal of Operations Research and Information Systems IJORIS 1947932819479336 John Wang Journals . IGI Global . Retrieved 13 November 2011 .  The Society for Modeling  Simulation International . JDMS . Scs.org . Retrieved 13 November 2011 .  The OR Society Archived 24 April 2006 at the Library of Congress Web Archives  TOP . Springer.com . Retrieved 13 November 2011 . Further reading  edit  Classic books and articles  edit  R. E. Bellman, Dynamic Programming , Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1957 Abraham Charnes, William W. Cooper, Management Models and Industrial Applications of Linear Programming , Volumes I and II, New York, John Wiley  Sons, 1961 Abraham Charnes, William W. Cooper, A. Henderson, An Introduction to Linear Programming , New York, John Wiley  Sons, 1953 C. West Churchman, Russell L. Ackoff  E. L. Arnoff, Introduction to Operations Research , New York J. Wiley and Sons, 1957 George B. Dantzig, Linear Programming and Extensions , Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1963 Lester K. Ford, Jr., D. Ray Fulkerson, Flows in Networks , Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1962 Jay W. Forrester, Industrial Dynamics , Cambridge, MIT Press, 1961 L. V. Kantorovich, Mathematical Methods of Organizing and Planning Production Management Science , 4, 1960, 266422 Ralph Keeney, Howard Raiffa, Decisions with Multiple Objectives Preferences and Value Tradeoffs , New York, John Wiley  Sons, 1976 H. W. Kuhn, The Hungarian Method for the Assignment Problem, Naval Research Logistics Quarterly , 12, 1955, 8397 H. W. Kuhn, A. W. Tucker, Nonlinear Programming, pp.  481492 in Proceedings of the Second Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability B. O. Koopman, Search and Screening General Principles and Historical Applications , New York, Pergamon Press, 1980 Tjalling C. Koopmans, editor, Activity Analysis of Production and Allocation , New York, John Wiley  Sons, 1951 Charles C. Holt, Franco Modigliani, John F. Muth, Herbert A. Simon, Planning Production, Inventories, and Work Force , Englewood Cliffs, NJ, Prentice-Hall, 1960 Philip M. Morse, George E. Kimball, Methods of Operations Research , New York, MIT Press and John Wiley  Sons, 1951 Robert O. Schlaifer, Howard Raiffa, Applied Statistical Decision Theory , Cambridge, Division of Research, Harvard Business School, 1961 Classic textbooks  edit  Frederick S. Hillier  Gerald J. Lieberman, Introduction to Operations Research , McGraw-Hill Boston MA 10th Edition, 2014 Taha, Hamdy A., Operations Research An Introduction, Pearson, 10th Edition, 2016 Robert J. Thierauf  Richard A. Grosse, Decision Making Through Operations Research, John Wiley  Sons, INC, 1970 Harvey M. Wagner, Principles of Operations Research , Englewood Cliffs, Prentice-Hall, 1969 History  edit  Saul I. Gass, Arjang A. Assad, An Annotated Timeline of Operations Research An Informal History . New York, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2005. Saul I. Gass Editor, Arjang A. Assad Editor, Profiles in Operations Research Pioneers and Innovators . Springer, 2011 Maurice W. Kirby Operational Research Society Great Britain. Operational Research in War and Peace The British Experience from the 1930s to 1970, Imperial College Press, 2003. ISBN   1-86094-366-7 , ISBN   978-1-86094-366-9 J. K. Lenstra, A. H. G. Rinnooy Kan, A. Schrijver editors History of Mathematical Programming A Collection of Personal Reminiscences , North-Holland, 1991 Charles W. McArthur, Operations Analysis in the U.S. Army Eighth Air Force in World War II , History of Mathematics, Vol. 4, Providence, American Mathematical Society, 1990 C. H. Waddington, O. R. in World War 2 Operational Research Against the U-boat , London, Elek Science, 1973. External links  edit  Wikimedia Commons has media related to Operations research . Wikiquote has quotations related to Operations research What is Operations Research International Federation of Operational Research Societies The Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences INFORMS Occupational Outlook Handbook, U.S. Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics v t e Systems science Systems types Anatomical Art Biological Complex Complex adaptive Conceptual Coupled humanenvironment Database Dynamical Ecological Economic Energy Formal Holarchic Information Legal Measurement Metric Multi-agent Nervous Nonlinear Operating Physical Planetary Political Sensory Social Star Writing Concepts Doubling time Leverage points Limiting factor Negative feedback Positive feedback Theoretical fields Chaos theory Complex systems Control theory Cybernetics Earth system science Living systems Sociotechnical system Systemics Urban metabolism World-systems theory Analysis Biology Dynamics Ecology Engineering Neuroscience Pharmacology Psychology Theory Thinking Systems scientists Alexander Bogdanov Russell L. Ackoff William Ross Ashby Ruzena Bajcsy Bla H. Bnthy Gregory Bateson Anthony Stafford Beer Richard E. Bellman Ludwig von Bertalanffy Margaret Boden Kenneth E. Boulding Murray Bowen Kathleen Carley Mary Cartwright C. West Churchman Manfred Clynes George Dantzig Edsger W. Dijkstra Fred Emery Heinz von Foerster Stephanie Forrest Jay Wright Forrester Barbara Grosz Charles A.  S. Hall Lydia Kavraki James J. Kay Faina M. Kirillova George Klir Allenna Leonard Edward Norton Lorenz Niklas Luhmann Humberto Maturana Margaret Mead Donella Meadows Mihajlo D. Mesarovic James Grier Miller Radhika Nagpal Howard T. Odum Talcott Parsons Ilya Prigogine Qian Xuesen Anatol Rapoport Peter Senge Claude Shannon Katia Sycara Eric Trist Francisco Varela Manuela M. Veloso Kevin Warwick Norbert Wiener Jennifer Wilby Anthony Wilden Applications Systems theory in anthropology Systems theory in archaeology Systems theory in political science Organizations List Principia Cybernetica Category Portal Commons v t e Areas of mathematics Foundations Category theory Information theory Mathematical logic Philosophy of mathematics Set theory Algebra Abstract Elementary Linear Multilinear Analysis Calculus Real analysis Complex analysis Differential equations Functional analysis Discrete Combinatorics Graph theory Order theory Game theory Geometry Algebraic Analytic Differential Discrete Euclidean Finite Number theory Arithmetic Algebraic number theory Analytic number theory Diophantine geometry Topology Algebraic Differential Geometric Applied Control theory Mathematical biology Mathematical chemistry Mathematical economics Mathematical finance Mathematical physics Mathematical psychology Mathematical statistics Probability Statistics Computational Computer science Theory of computation Numerical analysis Optimization Computer algebra Others History of mathematics Recreational mathematics Mathematics and art Mathematics education Category Portal Commons WikiProject v t e Microeconomics Major topics Aggregation Budget set Consumer choice Convexity and non-convexity Cost Average Marginal Opportunity Social Sunk Transaction Costbenefit analysis Deadweight loss Distribution Economies of scale Economies of scope Elasticity Equilibrium General Exchange Externality Firms Goods and services Goods Service Household Incomeconsumption curve Information Indifference curve Intertemporal choice Market Market failure Market structure Competition Monopolistic Perfect Duopoly Monopoly Bilateral Monopsony Oligopoly Oligopsony Pareto efficiency Preferences Price Production Profit Public goods Rationing Rent Returns to scale Risk aversion Scarcity Shortage Substitution effect Surplus Social choice Supply  demand Uncertainty Utility Expected Marginal Wage Subfields Behavioral Business Computational Statistical decision theory Econometrics Engineering Civil engineering economics Experimental Game theory Industrial organization Labor Law Managerial Mathematical Microfoundations of macroeconomics Operations research Optimization Welfare See also Economics Applied Macroeconomics Political economy Category Authority control GND  4043586-6 NARA  10641204 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleOperations_research oldid914544148  Categories  Operations research Industrial engineering Mathematical optimization in business Management science Applied statistics Engineering disciplines Mathematical and quantitative methods economics Mathematical economics Hidden categories CS1 errors deprecated parameters Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors missing periodical Webarchive template other archives Use dmy dates from November 2011 Articles containing explicitly cited English-language text All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from March 2019 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2007 Articles to be expanded from March 2010 All articles to be expanded Articles using small message boxes Articles with unsourced statements from December 2010 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Wikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2016 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from March 2019 Commons category link is on Wikidata Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with NARA identifiers