Video game From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Video Games redirects here. For other uses, see Video Games disambiguation . People playing a large scale version of the iconic Pong video game at the National Videogame Museum Part of a series on Video games Platforms Arcade game Console game Game console Home console Electronic game Audio game Electronic handheld Handheld game Handheld console Mobile game Online game Social network game PC game Linux Mac Genres Action Beat em up Fighting Platform Shooter Survival Battle royale Action-adventure Stealth Survival horror Adventure Interactive fiction Interactive movie Visual novel Role-playing Action role-playing Tactical role-playing Simulation Construction and management Life simulation Sports Vehicle Strategy Multiplayer online battle arena Real-time strategy Real-time tactics Turn-based strategy Turn-based tactics Massively multiplayer online Lists Arcade video games Best-selling video games Best-selling video game franchises Highest-grossing video game franchises Most-played video games by player count Most-played mobile games by player count Highest-grossing arcade games Video games considered among the best Game of the Year awards Video games notable for negative reception Development Game AI Game design Interaction design Game programming Level design Video game art Video game design Video game graphics Video game music v t e A video game is an electronic game that involves interaction with a user interface to generate visual feedback on a two- or three-dimensional video display device such as a TV screen , virtual reality headset or computer monitor . Since the 1980s, video games have become an increasingly important part of the entertainment industry , and whether they are also a form of art is a matter of dispute. The electronic systems used to play video games are called platforms . Video games are developed and released for one or several platforms and may not be available on others. Specialized platforms such as arcade games , which present the game in a large, typically coin-operated chassis, were common in the 1980s in video arcades , but declined in popularity as other, more affordable platforms became available. These include dedicated devices such as video game consoles , as well as general-purpose computers like a laptop , desktop or handheld computing devices . The input device used for games, the game controller , varies across platforms. Common controllers include gamepads , joysticks , mouse devices , keyboards , the touchscreens of mobile devices , or even a persons body, using a Kinect sensor. Players view the game on a display device such as a television or computer monitor or sometimes on virtual reality head-mounted display goggles. There are often game sound effects , music and voice actor lines which come from loudspeakers or headphones . Some games in the 2000s include haptic , vibration-creating effects, force feedback peripherals and virtual reality headsets. In the 2010s, the commercial importance of the video game industry is increasing. The emerging Asian markets and mobile games on smartphones in particular are driving the growth of the industry. As of 2018, video games generated sales of US134.9 billion annually worldwide, 1  and were the third-largest segment in the U.S. entertainment market, behind broadcast and cable TV. Contents 1 History 2 Overview 2.1 Platforms 2.1.1 PC 2.1.2 Home console 2.1.3 Handheld 2.1.4 Arcade 2.1.5 Web browser 2.1.6 Mobile 2.1.7 Virtual reality 2.1.8 Blockchain 2.2 Genres 2.3 Classifications 2.3.1 Casual games 2.3.2 Serious games 2.3.3 Educational games 2.4 Controllers 3 Development 3.1 Downloadable content 3.1.1 Expansion packs 3.2 Modifications 3.3 Cheating 3.4 Glitches 3.5 Easter eggs 4 Theory 5 Emulation 6 Social aspects 6.1 Demographics 6.2 Culture 6.3 Multiplayer 7 Behavioral effects 7.1 Objections to video games 7.2 Possible benefits 7.2.1 Self-determination theory 7.2.2 Well-being 7.2.3 Problem-solving skills 7.2.4 Group relations 7.2.5 Physical activities 8 Ratings and censorship 8.1 United States 8.2 Europe 8.2.1 Germany BPjM and USK 8.3 Japan 9 Commercial aspects 9.1 Game sales 9.2 Conventions 9.3 Esports 9.4 Copyright of video games 10 Museums 11 See also 12 Notes 13 References 14 External links History Main article History of video games See also Early history of video games Tennis for Two , an early analog computer game that used an oscilloscope for a display A modern recreation of a controller for Tennis for Two Early games used interactive electronic devices with various display formats. The earliest example is from 1947a  Cathode ray tube Amusement Device was filed for a patent on 25 January 1947, by Thomas T. Goldsmith Jr. and Estle Ray Mann, and issued on 14 December 1948, as U.S. Patent 2455992. 2  Inspired by radar display technology, it consisted of an analog device that allowed a user to control a vector-drawn dot on the screen to simulate a missile being fired at targets, which were drawings fixed to the screen. 3  Other early examples include The Nimrod computer at the 1951 Festival of Britain  OXO a tic-tac-toe Computer game by Alexander S. Douglas for the EDSAC in 1952 Tennis for Two , an electronic interactive game engineered by William Higinbotham in 1958 Spacewar , written by MIT students Martin Graetz, Steve Russell, and Wayne Wiitanens on a DEC PDP-1 computer in 1961 and the hit ping pong -style Pong , a 1972 game by Atari . Each game used different means of display NIMROD used a panel of lights to play the game of Nim , 4  OXO used a graphical display to play tic-tac-toe 5  Tennis for Two used an oscilloscope to display a side view of a tennis court, 3  and Spacewar used the DEC PDP-1s vector display to have two spaceships battle each other. 6  Nolan Bushnell at the Game Developers Conference in 2011 In 1971, Computer Space , created by Nolan Bushnell and Ted Dabney , was the first commercially sold, coin-operated video game. It used a black-and-white television for its display, and the computer system was made of 74 series TTL chips . 7  The game was featured in the 1973 science fiction film Soylent Green . Computer Space was followed in 1972 by the Magnavox Odyssey , the first home console. Modeled after a late 1960s prototype console developed by Ralph H. Baer called the Brown Box, it also used a standard television. 3  8  These were followed by two versions of Atari s Pong  an arcade version in 1972 and a home version in 1975 that dramatically increased video game popularity. 9  The commercial success of Pong led numerous other companies to develop Pong clones and their own systems, spawning the video game industry . 10  A flood of Pong clones eventually led to the video game crash of 1977 , which came to an end with the mainstream success of Taito s 1978 shooter game Space Invaders , 11  marking the beginning of the golden age of arcade video games and inspiring dozens of manufacturers to enter the market. 11  12  The game inspired arcade machines to become prevalent in mainstream locations such as shopping malls, traditional storefronts, restaurants, and convenience stores. 13  The game also became the subject of numerous articles and stories on television and in newspapers and magazines, establishing video gaming as a rapidly growing mainstream hobby. 14  15  Space Invaders was soon licensed for the Atari VCS later known as Atari 2600, becoming the first  killer app  and quadrupling the consoles sales. 16  This helped Atari recover from their earlier losses, 17  and in turn the Atari VCS revived the home video game market during the second generation of consoles , up until the North American video game crash of 1983 . 18  The home video game industry was revitalized shortly afterwards by the widespread success of the Nintendo Entertainment System , 19  which marked a shift in the dominance of the video game industry from the United States to Japan during the third generation of consoles . 20  A number of video game developers emerged in Britain in the late 1970s and early 1980s. 21  22  23  24  Overview Platforms See also History of video games After Pong , the Atari 2600 was the first game console to achieve widespread success and awareness. The term platform refers to the specific combination of electronic components or computer hardware which, in conjunction with software, allows a video game to operate. 25  The term system is also commonly used. The distinctions below are not always clear and there may be games that bridge one or more platforms. In addition to laptop  desktop computers and mobile devices , there are other devices which have the ability to play games but are not primarily video game machines, such as PDAs and graphing calculators . PC In common use a  PC game  refers to a form of media that involves a player interacting with a personal computer connected to a video monitor . 26  Personal computers are not dedicated game platforms, so there may be differences running the same game in different hardware, also the openness allows some features to developers like reduced software cost, 27  increased flexibility, increased innovation, emulation, creation of modifications  mods , open hosting for online gaming in which a person plays a video game with people who are in a different household and others. Home console An Xbox 360 console and controller A  console game  is played on a specialized electronic device  home video game console  that connects to a common television set or composite video monitor , unlike PCs , which can run all sorts of computer programs, a console is a dedicated video game platform manufactured by a specific company. Usually consoles only run games developed for it, or games from other platform made by the same company, but never games developed by its direct competitor, even if the same game is available on different platforms. It often comes with a specific game controller . Major console platforms include Xbox , PlayStation , and Nintendo . Handheld The Nintendo Game Boy was the first successful handheld console, selling over 100 million systems. A  handheld  gaming device is a small, self-contained electronic device that is portable and can be held in a users hands. It features the console, a small screen, speakers and buttons, joystick or other game controllers in a single unit. Like consoles, handhelds are dedicated platforms, and share almost the same characteristics. Handheld hardware usually is less powerful than PC or console hardware. Some handheld games from the late 1970s and early 1980s could only play one game. In the 1990s and 2000s, a number of handheld games used cartridges, which enabled them to be used to play many different games. Arcade A police-themed arcade game in which players use a light gun  Arcade game  generally refers to a game played on an even more specialized type of electronic device that is typically designed to play only one game and is encased in a special, large coin-operated cabinet which has one built-in console, controllers joystick, buttons, etc., a CRT screen , and audio amplifier and speakers. Arcade games often have brightly painted logos and images relating to the theme of the game. While most arcade games are housed in a vertical cabinet, which the user typically stands in front of to play, some arcade games use a tabletop approach, in which the display screen is housed in a table-style cabinet with a see-through table top. With table-top games, the users typically sit to play. In the 1990s and 2000s, some arcade games offered players a choice of multiple games. In the 1980s, video arcades were businesses in which game players could use a number of arcade video games. In the 2010s, there are far fewer video arcades, but some movie theaters and family entertainment centers still have them. Web browser The web browser has also established itself as platform in its own right in the 2000s, while providing a cross-platform environment for video games designed to be played on a wide spectrum of platforms. In turn, this has generated new terms to qualify classes of web browser-based games. These games may be identified based on the website that they appear, such as with  Miniclip  games. Others are named based on the programming platform used to develop them, such as Java and Flash games. Mobile With the advent of standard operating systems for mobile devices such as iOS and Android and devices with greater hardware performance, mobile gaming has become a significant platform. These games may utilize unique features of mobile devices that are not necessary present on other platforms, such as global positing information and camera devices to support augmented reality gameplay. Mobile games also led into the development of microtransactions as a valid revenue model for casual games. Virtual reality Virtual reality VR games generally require players to use a special head-mounted unit that provides stereoscopic screens and motion tracking to immerse a player within virtual environment that responds to their head movements. Some VR systems include control units for the players hands as to provide a direct way to interact with the virtual world. VR systems generally require a separate computer, console, or other processing device that couples with the head-mounted unit. Blockchain A new platform of video games emerged in late 2017 in which users could take ownership of game assets  digital assets  using Blockchain technologies. 28  An example of this is Cryptokitties . 28  Genres Main articles Video game genre and Gameplay A video game, like most other forms of media, may be categorized into genres . Video game genres are used to categorize video games based on their gameplay interaction rather than visual or narrative differences. 29  30  A video game genre is defined by a set of gameplay challenges and are classified independent of their setting or game-world content, unlike other works of fiction such as films or books. For example, a shooter game is still a shooter game, regardless of whether it takes place in a fantasy world or in outer space. 31  32  Because genres are dependent on content for definition, genres have changed and evolved as newer styles of video games have come into existence. Ever advancing technology and production values related to video game development have fostered more lifelike and complex games which have in turn introduced or enhanced genre possibilities e.g., virtual pets, pushed the boundaries of existing video gaming or in some cases add new possibilities in play such as that seen with games specifically designed for devices like Sonys EyeToy . Some genres represent combinations of others, such as massively multiplayer online role-playing games , or, more commonly, MMORPGs. It is also common to see higher level genre terms that are collective in nature across all other genres such as with action, musicrhythm or horror-themed video games.  citation needed  Classifications Casual games Main article Casual game Casual games derive their name from their ease of accessibility, simple to understand gameplay and quick to grasp rule sets. Additionally, casual games frequently support the ability to jump in and out of play on demand. Casual games as a format existed long before the term was coined and include video games such as Solitaire or Minesweeper which can commonly be found pre-installed with many versions of the Microsoft Windows operating system. Examples of genres within this category are match three , hidden object , time management , puzzle or many of the tower defense style games. Casual games are generally available through app stores and online retailers such as PopCap , Zylom and GameHouse or provided for free play through web portals such as Newgrounds . While casual games are most commonly played on personal computers, phones or tablets, they can also be found on many of the on-line console system download services e.g., the PlayStation Network , WiiWare or Xbox Live . Serious games Main article Serious game Serious games are games that are designed primarily to convey information or a learning experience to the player. Some serious games may even fail to qualify as a video game in the traditional sense of the term. Educational software does not typically fall under this category e.g., touch typing tutors, language learning programs, etc. and the primary distinction would appear to be based on the games primary goal as well as target age demographics. As with the other categories, this description is more of a guideline than a rule. Serious games are games generally made for reasons beyond simple entertainment and as with the core and casual games may include works from any given genre, although some such as exercise games , educational games , or propaganda games may have a higher representation in this group due to their subject matter. These games are typically designed to be played by professionals as part of a specific job or for skill set improvement. They can also be created to convey social-political awareness on a specific subject. A screenshot from Microsoft Flight Simulator showing a Beechcraft 1900 D One of the longest-running serious games franchises is Microsoft Flight Simulator , first published in 1982 under that name. The United States military uses virtual reality -based simulations, such as VBS1 for training exercises, 33  as do a growing number of first responder roles e.g., police, firefighters, EMTs. 34  One example of a non-game environment utilized as a platform for serious game development would be the virtual world of Second Life , which is currently used by several United States governmental departments e.g., NOAA , NASA , JPL , Universities e.g., Ohio University , MIT  for educational and remote learning programs 35  and businesses e.g., IBM , Cisco Systems  for meetings and training. 36  Tactical media in video games plays a crucial role in making a statement or conveying a message on important relevant issues. This form of media allows for a broader audience to be able to receive and gain access to certain information that otherwise may not have reached such people. An example of tactical media in video games would be newsgames . These are short games related to contemporary events designed to illustrate a point. 37  For example, Take Action Games is a game studio collective that was co-founded by Susana Ruiz and has made successful serious games. Some of these games include Darfur is Dying , Finding Zoe , and In The Balance . All of these games bring awareness to important issues and events. 38  Educational games See also Educational video games and Educational software The VTech Socrates is one of many educational video game consoles. On 23 September 2009, U.S. President Barack Obama launched a campaign called Educate to Innovate aimed at improving the technological, mathematical, scientific and engineering abilities of American students. This campaign states that it plans to harness the power of interactive games to help achieve the goal of students excelling in these departments. 39  40  This campaign has stemmed into many new opportunities for the video game realm and has contributed to many new competitions. Some of these competitions include the Stem National Video Game Competition and the Imagine Cup . 41  42  Both of these bring a focus to relevant and important current issues through gaming. www.NobelPrize.org entices the user to learn about information pertaining to the Nobel prize achievements while engaging in a fun video game. 43  There are many different types and styles of educational games, including counting to spelling to games for kids, to games for adults. Some other games do not have any particular targeted audience in mind and intended to simply educate or inform whoever views or plays the game. Controllers Main article Game controller A North American Super NES game controller from the early 1990s Video game can use several types of input devices to translate human actions to a game, the most common game controllers are keyboard and mouse for  PC games , consoles usually come with specific gamepads , handheld consoles have built in buttons. Other game controllers are commonly used for specific games like racing wheels , light guns or dance pads . Digital cameras can also be used as game controllers capturing movements of the body of the player. As technology continues to advance, more can be added onto the controller to give the player a more immersive experience when playing different games. There are some controllers that have presets so that the buttons are mapped a certain way to make playing certain games easier. Along with the presets, a player can sometimes custom map the buttons to better accommodate their play style. On keyboard and mouse, different actions in the game are already preset to keys on the keyboard. Most games allow the player to change that so that the actions are mapped to different keys that are more to their liking. The companies that design the controllers are trying to make the controller visually appealing and also feel comfortable in the hands of the consumer. An example of a technology that was incorporated into the controller was the touchscreen . It allows the player to be able to interact with the game differently than before. The person could move around in menus easier and they are also able to interact with different objects in the game. They can pick up some objects, equip others, or even just move the objects out of the players path. Another example is motion sensor where a persons movement is able to be captured and put into a game. Some motion sensor games are based on where the controller is. The reason for that is because there is a signal that is sent from the controller to the console or computer so that the actions being done can create certain movements in the game. Other type of motion sensor games are webcam style where the player moves around in front of it, and the actions are repeated by a game character. Development Main article Game development See also Video game industry practices Developers use various tools to create video games. Here an editor is fine-tuning the virtual camera system . Video game development and authorship, much like any other form of entertainment, is frequently a cross-disciplinary field. Video game developers , as employees within this industry are commonly referred, primarily include programmers and graphic designers . Over the years this has expanded to include almost every type of skill that one might see prevalent in the creation of any movie or television program, including sound designers , musicians, and other technicians as well as skills that are specific to video games, such as the game designer . All of these are managed by producers . In the early days of the industry, it was more common for a single person to manage all of the roles needed to create a video game. As platforms have become more complex and powerful in the type of material they can present, larger teams have been needed to generate all of the art, programming, cinematography, and more. This is not to say that the age of the one-man shop is gone, as this is still sometimes found in the casual gaming and handheld markets, 44  where smaller games are prevalent due to technical limitations such as limited RAM or lack of dedicated 3D graphics rendering capabilities on the target platform e.g., some PDAs .  citation needed  With the growth of the size of development teams in the industry, the problem of cost has increased. Development studios need to be able to pay their staff a competitive wage in order to attract and retain the best talent, while publishers are constantly looking to keep costs down in order to maintain profitability on their investment. Typically, a video game console development team can range in sizes of anywhere from 5 to 50 people, with some teams exceeding 100. In May 2009, one game project was reported to have a development staff of 450. 45  The growth of team size combined with greater pressure to get completed projects into the market to begin recouping production costs has led to a greater occurrence of missed deadlines, rushed games and the release of unfinished products. 46  Downloadable content Main article Downloadable content A phenomenon of additional game content at a later date, often for additional funds, began with digital video game distribution known as downloadable content DLC. Developers can use digital distribution to issue new storylines after the main game is released, such as Rockstar Games with Grand Theft Auto IV  The Lost and Damned and The Ballad of Gay Tony , or Bethesda with Fallout 3 and its expansions . New gameplay modes can also become available, for instance, Call of Duty and its zombie modes, 47  48  49  a multiplayer mode for Mushroom Wars or a higher difficulty level for Metro Last Light . Smaller packages of DLC are also common, ranging from better in-game weapons  Dead Space , Just Cause 2 , character outfits  LittleBigPlanet , Minecraft , or new songs to perform  SingStar , Rock Band , Guitar Hero . Expansion packs Main article Expansion pack A variation of downloadable content is expansion packs. Unlike DLC, expansion packs add a whole section to the game that either already exists in the games code or is developed after the game is released. Expansions add new maps, missions, weapons, and other things that werent previously accessible in the original game. An example of an expansion is Bungie s Destiny , which had the Rise of Iron expansion. The expansion added new weapons, new maps, and higher levels, and remade old missions. Expansions are added to the base game to help prolong the life of the game itself until the company is able to produce a sequel or a new game altogether. Developers may plan out their games life and already have the code for the expansion in the game, but inaccessible by players, who later unlock these expansions, sometimes for free and sometimes at an extra cost. Some developers make games and add expansions later, so that they could see what additions the players would like to have. There are also expansions that are set apart from the original game and are considered a stand-alone game, such as Ubisoft s expansion Assassins Creed IV Black Flag Freedoms Cry , which features a different character than the original game. Modifications Main article Mod computer gaming Many games produced for the PC are designed such that technically oriented consumers can modify the game. These mods can add an extra dimension of replayability and interest. Developers such as id Software , Valve Corporation , Crytek , Bethesda , Epic Games and Blizzard Entertainment ship their games with some of the development tools used to make the game, along with documentation to assist mod developers. The Internet provides an inexpensive medium to promote and distribute mods, and they may be a factor in the commercial success of some games. 50  This allows for the kind of success seen by popular mods such as the Half-Life mod Counter-Strike . Cheating Main article Cheating video games Cheating in computer games may involve cheat codes and hidden spots implemented by the game developers, 51  52  modification of game code by third parties, 53  54  or players exploiting a software glitch. Modifications are facilitated by either cheat cartridge hardware or a software trainer . 53  Cheats usually make the game easier by providing an unlimited amount of some resource for example weapons, health, or ammunition or perhaps the ability to walk through walls. 52  53  Other cheats might give access to otherwise unplayable levels or provide unusual or amusing features, like altered game colors or other graphical appearances. Glitches Main article Glitch Software errors not detected by software testers during development can find their way into released versions of computer and video games. This may happen because the glitch only occurs under unusual circumstances in the game, was deemed too minor to correct, or because the game development was hurried to meet a publication deadline. Glitches can range from minor graphical errors to serious bugs that can delete saved data or cause the game to malfunction. In some cases publishers will release updates referred to as patches  to repair glitches. Sometimes a glitch may be beneficial to the player these are often referred to as exploits . Easter eggs Easter eggs are hidden messages or jokes left in games by developers that are not part of the main game. 55  Easter eggs are secret responses that occur as a result of an undocumented set of commands. The results can vary from a simple printed message or image, to a page of programmer credits or a small videogame hidden inside an otherwise serious piece of software. Videogame cheat codes are a specific type of Easter egg, in which entering a secret command will unlock special powers or new levels for the player. 56  57  Theory Main article Game studies Although departments of computer science have been studying the technical aspects of video games for years, theories that examine games as an artistic medium are a relatively recent development in the humanities. The two most visible schools in this emerging field are ludology and narratology . Narrativists approach video games in the context of what Janet Murray calls Cyberdrama. That is to say, their major concern is with video games as a storytelling medium, one that arises out of interactive fiction . Murray puts video games in the context of the Holodeck , a fictional piece of technology from Star Trek , arguing for the video game as a medium in which the player is allowed to become another person, and to act out in another world. 58  This image of video games received early widespread popular support, and forms the basis of films such as Tron , eXistenZ and The Last Starfighter . Ludologists break sharply and radically from this idea. They argue that a video game is first and foremost a game, which must be understood in terms of its rules, interface, and the concept of play that it deploys. Espen J. Aarseth argues that, although games certainly have plots, characters, and aspects of traditional narratives, these aspects are incidental to gameplay. For example, Aarseth is critical of the widespread attention that narrativists have given to the heroine of the game Tomb Raider , saying that the dimensions of Lara Croft s body, already analyzed to death by film theorists , are irrelevant to me as a player, because a different-looking body would not make me play differently... When I play, I dont even see her body, but see through it and past it. 59  Simply put, ludologists reject traditional theories of art because they claim that the artistic and socially relevant qualities of a video game are primarily determined by the underlying set of rules, demands, and expectations imposed on the player. While many games rely on emergent principles , video games commonly present simulated story worlds where emergent behavior occurs within the context of the game. The term emergent narrative has been used to describe how, in a simulated environment, storyline can be created simply by what happens to the player. 60  However, emergent behavior is not limited to sophisticated games. In general, any place where event-driven instructions occur for AI in a game, emergent behavior will exist. For instance, take a racing game in which cars are programmed to avoid crashing, and they encounter an obstacle in the track the cars might then maneuver to avoid the obstacle causing the cars behind them to slow andor maneuver to accommodate the cars in front of them and the obstacle. The programmer never wrote code to specifically create a traffic jam, yet one now exists in the game. Emulation Main article Video game console emulator Project64 , a Nintendo 64 emulator, running Star Fox 64 on a Windows 8 platform An emulator is a program that replicates the behavior of a video game console , allowing games to run on a different platform from the original hardware. Emulators exist for PCs , smartphones and consoles other than the original. Emulators are generally used to play old games, hack existing games , translate unreleased games in a specific region , or add enhanced features to games like improved graphics, speed up or down, bypass regional lockouts, or online multiplayer support. Some manufacturers have released official emulators for their own consoles. For example, Nintendos Virtual Console allows users to play games for old Nintendo consoles on the Wii , Wii U , and 3DS . Virtual Console is part of Nintendos strategy for deterring video game piracy. 61  In November 2015, Microsoft launched backwards compatibility of Xbox 360 games on Xbox One console via emulation. 62  Also, Sony announced relaunching PS2 games on PS4 via emulation. 63  According to Sony Computer Entertainment America v. Bleem , creating an emulator for a proprietary video game console is legal. 64  However, Nintendo claims that emulators promote the distribution of illegally copied games. 65  Social aspects Demographics See also Gamer   Demographics The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject . You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.  September 2017   Learn how and when to remove this template message  The November 2005 Nielsen Active Gamer Study, taking a survey of 2,000 regular gamers , found that the U.S. games market is diversifying. The age group among male players has expanded significantly in the 2540 age group. For casual online puzzle-style and simple mobile cell phone games, the gender divide is more or less equal between men and women. More recently there has been a growing segment of female players engaged with the aggressive style of games historically considered to fall within traditionally male genres e.g., first-person shooters . According to the ESRB, almost 41 of PC gamers are women. 66  Participation among African-Americans is lower. One survey of over 2000 game developers returned responses from only 2.5 who identified as black. 67  See also Women and video games See also Race and video games When comparing todays industry climate with that of 20 years ago, women and many adults are more inclined to be using products in the industry. While the market for teen and young adult men is still a strong market, it is the other demographics which are posting significant growth. The Entertainment Software Association ESA provides the following summary for 2011 based on a study of almost 1,200 American households carried out by Ipsos MediaCT 68  The average gamer is 30 years old and has been playing for 12 years. Eighty-two percent of gamers are 18 years of age or older. Forty-two percent of all players are women and women over 18 years of age are one of the industrys fastest growing demographics. Twenty-nine percent of game players are over the age of 50, an increase from nine percent in 1999. Sixty-five percent of gamers play games with other gamers in person. Fifty-five percent of gamers play games on their phones or handheld device. A 2006 academic study, based on a survey answered by 10,000 gamers, identified the gaymers gamers that identify as gay as a demographic group. 69  70  71  A follow-up survey in 2009 studied the purchase habits and content preferences of people in the group. 72  73  74  Based on the study by NPD group in 2011, approximately 91 percent of children aged 217 play games. 75  Culture Main article Video game culture Video game culture is a worldwide new media subculture formed around video games and game playing. As computer and video games have increased in popularity over time, they have had a significant influence on popular culture. Video game culture has also evolved over time hand in hand with internet culture as well as the increasing popularity of mobile games . Many people who play video games identify as gamers , which can mean anything from someone who enjoys games to someone who is passionate about it. As video games become more social with multiplayer and online capability , gamers find themselves in growing social networks . Gaming can both be entertainment as well as competition, as a new trend known as electronic sports is becoming more widely accepted. In the 2010s, video games and discussions of video game trends and topics can be seen in social media , politics, television, film and music. Multiplayer Main article Multiplayer video game Multiplayer video games are those that can be played either competitively, sometimes in Electronic Sports , or cooperatively by using either multiple input devices, or by hotseating . Tennis for Two , arguably the first video game, was a two player game, as was its successor Pong . The first commercially available game console, the Magnavox Odyssey , had two controller inputs. Since then, most consoles have been shipped with two or four controller inputs. Some have had the ability to expand to four, eight or as many as 12 inputs with additional adapters, such as the Multitap . Multiplayer arcade games typically feature play for two to four players, sometimes tilting the monitor on its back for a top-down viewing experience allowing players to sit opposite one another. Many early computer games for non-PC descendant based platforms featured multiplayer support. Personal computer systems from Atari and Commodore both regularly featured at least two game ports. PC-based computer games started with a lower availability of multiplayer options because of technical limitations. PCs typically had either one or no game ports at all. Network games for these early personal computers were generally limited to only text based adventures or MUDs that were played remotely on a dedicated server. This was due both to the slow speed of modems 300-1200-bits, and the prohibitive cost involved with putting a computer online in such a way where multiple visitors could make use of it. However, with the advent of widespread local area networking technologies and Internet based online capabilities, the number of players in modern games can be 32 or higher, sometimes featuring integrated text andor voice chat. Massively multiplayer online game MMOs can offer extremely high numbers of simultaneous players Eve Online set a record with 65,303 players on a single server in 2013. 76  Behavioral effects Main article Video game behavioral effects It has been shown that action video game players have better handeye coordination and visuo-motor skills , such as their resistance to distraction , their sensitivity to information in the peripheral vision and their ability to count briefly presented objects, than nonplayers. 77  Researchers found that such enhanced abilities could be acquired by training with action games, involving challenges that switch attention between different locations, but not with games requiring concentration on single objects. It has been suggested by a few studies that onlineoffline video gaming can be used as a therapeutic tool in the treatment of different mental health concerns.  which  In Steven Johnson s book, Everything Bad Is Good for You , he argues that video games in fact demand far more from a player than traditional games like Monopoly . To experience the game, the player must first determine the objectives, as well as how to complete them. They must then learn the game controls and how the human-machine interface works, including menus and HUDs . Beyond such skills, which after some time become quite fundamental and are taken for granted by many gamers, video games are based upon the player navigating and eventually mastering a highly complex system with many variables. This requires a strong analytical ability, as well as flexibility and adaptability. He argues that the process of learning the boundaries, goals, and controls of a given game is often a highly demanding one that calls on many different areas of cognitive function. Indeed, most games require a great deal of patience and focus from the player, and, contrary to the popular perception that games provide instant gratification, games actually delay gratification far longer than other forms of entertainment such as film or even many books. 78  Some research suggests video games may even increase players attention capacities. 79  Learning principles found in video games have been identified as possible techniques with which to reform the U.S. education system. 80  It has been noticed that gamers adopt an attitude while playing that is of such high concentration, they do not realize they are learning, and that if the same attitude could be adopted at school, education would enjoy significant benefits. 81  Students are found to be learning by doing while playing video games while fostering creative thinking. 82  The U.S. Army has deployed machines such as the PackBot and UAV vehicles, which make use of a game-style hand controller to make it more familiar for young people. 83  According to research discussed at the 2008 Convention of the American Psychological Association, certain types of video games can improve the gamers dexterity as well as their ability to do problem solving. A study of 33 laparoscopic surgeons found that those who played video games were 27 percent faster at advanced surgical procedures and made 37 percent fewer errors compared to those who did not play video games. A second study of 303 laparoscopic surgeons 82 percent men 18 percent women also showed that surgeons who played video games requiring spatial skills and hand dexterity and then performed a drill testing these skills were significantly faster at their first attempt and across all 10 trials than the surgeons who did not play the video games first. 84  An experiment carried out by Richard De Lisi and Jennifer Woldorf demonstrates the positive effect that video games may have on spatial skills. De Lisi and Woldorf took two groups of third graders, one control group and one experiment group. Both groups took a paper-and-pencil test of mental rotation skills. After this test, the experiment group only played 11 sessions of the game Tetris . This game was chosen as it requires mental rotation. After this game, both groups took the test again. The result showed that the scores of the experiment group raised higher than that of the control group, thereby confirming this theory. 85  The research showing benefits from action games has been questioned due to methodological shortcomings, such as recruitment strategies and selection bias, potential placebo effects, and lack of baseline improvements in control groups. 86  In addition, many of the studies are cross-sectional , and of the longitudinal interventional trials, not all have found effects. 86  A response to this pointed out that the skill improvements from action games are more broad than predicted, such as mental rotation , which is not a common task in action games. 87  Action gamers are not only better at ignoring distractions, but also at focusing on the main task. 88  Objections to video games Main article Video game controversies Like other media, such as rock music notably heavy metal music and gangsta rap , video games have been the subject of objections, controversies and censorship, for instance because of depictions of violence, criminal activities, sexual themes, alcohol , tobacco and other drugs , propaganda, profanity or advertisements . Critics of video games include parents groups, politicians, religious groups, scientists and other advocacy groups . Claims that some video games cause addiction or violent behavior continue to be made and to be disputed. 89  There have been a number of societal and scientific arguments about whether the content of video games change the behavior and attitudes of a player, and whether this is reflected in video game culture overall. Since the early 1980s, advocates of video games have emphasized their use as an expressive medium , arguing for their protection under the laws governing freedom of speech and also as an educational tool . Detractors argue that video games are harmful and therefore should be subject to legislative oversight and restrictions . The positive and negative characteristics and effects of video games are the subject of scientific study. Results of investigations into links between video games and addiction , aggression , violence, social development , and a variety of stereotyping and sexual morality issues are debated. 90  A study was done that showed that young people who have had a greater exposure to violence in video games ended up behaving more aggressively towards people in a social environment. 91  In 2018, the World Health Organization declared  gaming disorder  a mental disorder for people who are addicted to video games. 92  93  Studies have shown video games can negatively effect health and mental state for some players. 94  Possible benefits In spite of the negative effects of video games, certain studies indicate that they may have value in terms of academic performance, perhaps because of the skills that are developed in the process. When you play ... games youre solving puzzles to move to the next level and that involves using some of the general knowledge and skills in maths, reading and science that youve been taught during the day, said Alberto Posso an Associate Professor at the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology, after analysing data from the results of standardized testing completed by over 12,000 high school students across Australia. As summarized by The Guardian , 95  the study published in the International Journal of Communication  found that students who played online games almost every day scored 15 points above average in maths and reading tests and 17 points above average in science. However, the reporter added an important comment that was not provided by some of the numerous Web sites that published a brief summary of the Australian study the methodology cannot prove that playing video games were the cause of the improvement. The Guardian also reported that a Columbia University study indicated that extensive video gaming by students in the 6 to 11 age group provided a greatly increased chance of high intellectual functioning and overall school competence. In an interview with CNN, Edward Castronova , a professor of Telecommunications at Indiana University Bloomington said he was not surprised by the outcome of the Australian study but also discussed the issue of causal connection. Though there is a link between gaming and higher math and science scores, it doesnt mean playing games caused the higher scores. It could just be that kids who are sharp are looking for a challenge, and they dont find it on social media, and maybe they do find it on board games and video games, he explained. 96  Video games have also been proven to raise self-esteem and build confidence. It gives people an opportunity to do things that they cannot do offline, and to discover new things about themselves. There is a social aspect to gaming as well  research has shown that a third of video game players make good friends online. As well as that, video games are also considered to be therapeutic as it helps to relieve stress. 97  Although short term, studies have shown that children with developmental delays gain a temporary physical improvement in health when they interact and play video games on a regular, and consistent basis due to the cognitive benefits and the use of hand eye coordination. 98  Self-determination theory Self-determination theory SDT is a macro theory of human motivation based around competence, autonomy, and relatedness to facilitate positive outcomes. 99  SDT provides a framework for understanding the effects of playing video games well-being, problem solving, group relations, physical activities. 100  101  These factors can be measured to determine the effect video games can have on people. 99  Well-being The ability to create an ideal image of ones self and being given multiple options to change that image gives a sense of satisfaction. This topic has much controversy it is unknown whether this freedom can be beneficial to ones character or detrimental. With increased game usage, a player can become too invested in a fictionally generated character, where the desire to look that way overpowers the enjoyment of the game. 102  Players see this character creation as entertainment and a release, creating a self-image they could not obtain in reality, bringing comfort outside of the game from lack of investment to the fictional character. Problems that arise based on character design may be link to personality disorders . 103  104  Problem-solving skills Cognitive skills can be enhanced through repetition of puzzles , memory games, spatial abilities and attention control. 99  101  105  Most video games present opportunities to use these skills with the ability to try multiple times even after failure. Many of these skills can be translated to reality and problem solving. This allows the player to learn from mistakes and fully understand how and why a solution to a problem may work. Some researchers believe that continual exposure to challenges may lead players to develop greater persistence over time after a study was shown that frequent players spent more time on puzzles in task that did not involve video games. 100  101  Although players were shown to spend more time on puzzles, much of that could have been due to the positive effects of problem solving in games, which involve forming strategy and weighing option before testing a solution. 99  Representatives of Game Academy claim that such games as Civilization, Total War, or X-Com, where strategy and resource management are key, help players to develop skills that are of great use to managers. Also, they found out that IT workers play unusual puzzle games like Portal or tower defense games like Defense Grid more often than specialists from other fields. 106  In a study that followed students through school, students that played video games showed higher levels of problem solving than students who did not. 100  This contradicts the previous study in that higher success rate was seen in video game players. Time being a factor for problem solving led to different conclusions in the different studies. See video game controversies for more. Group relations Online gaming being on the rise allows for video game players to communicate and work together in order to accomplish a certain task. Being able to work as a group in a game translates well to reality and jobs, where people must work together to accomplish a task. Research on players in violent and non-violent games show similar results, where the players relations improved to improve synergy. 94  Physical activities With the introduction of Wii Fit and VR virtual reality, exergame popularity has been increasing, allowing video game players to experience more active rather than sedentary game play. 107  Mobile apps have tried to expand this concept with the introduction of Pokmon Go , which involves walking to progress in the game. Due to exergaming being relatively new, there is still much to be researched. No major differences were seen in tests with children that played on the Wii vs. a non-active game after 12 weeks. 108  Testing a larger range of ages may show better results. Ratings and censorship Main article Video game content rating system Video game laws vary from country to country. Console manufacturers usually exercise tight control over the games that are published on their systems, so unusual or special-interest games are more likely to appear as PC games . Free, casual, and browser-based games are usually played on available computers, mobile phones, tablet computers or PDAs . Various organisations in different regions are responsible for giving content ratings to video games. United States A typical ESRB rating label, listing the rating and specific content descriptors for Rabbids Go Home The Entertainment Software Rating Board ESRB gives video games maturity ratings based on their content. For example, a game might be rated T for Teen if the game contained obscene words or violence. If a game contains explicit violence or sexual themes, it is likely to receive an M for Mature rating, which means that no one under 17 should play it. The rating AO, for Adults Only, indicates games with massive violence or nudity. There are no laws that prohibit children from purchasing M rated games in the United States. Laws attempting to prohibit minors from purchasing M rated games were established in California, Illinois , Michigan , Minnesota , and Louisiana , but all were overturned on the grounds that these laws violated the First Amendment. 109  However, many stores have opted to not sell such games to children anyway. One of the most controversial games of all time, Manhunt 2 by Rockstar Studios, was given an AO rating by the ESRB until Rockstar could make the content more suitable for a mature audience. Europe PEGIs content descriptor for Profanity Pan European Game Information PEGI is a system that was developed to standardize the game ratings in all of Europe not just European Union , although the majority are EU members, the current members are all EU members, except Germany and the 10 accession states Norway  Switzerland . Iceland is expected to join soon, as are the 10 EU accession states. For all PEGI members, they use it as their sole system, with the exception of the UK, where if a game contains certain material, 110  it must be rated by BBFC . The PEGI ratings are legally binding in Vienna and it is a criminal offence to sell a game to someone if it is rated above their age. 111  Germany BPjM and USK Stricter game rating laws mean that Germany does not operate within the PEGI. Instead, they adopt their own system of certification which is required by law. The Unterhaltungssoftware Selbstkontrolle USK checks every game before release and assigns an age rating to it  either none white, 6 years of age yellow, 12 years of age green, 16 years of age blue or 18 years of age red. It is forbidden for anyone, retailers, friends or parents alike, to allow a child access to a game for which he or she is underage. If a game is considered to be harmful to young people for example because of extremely violent, pornographic or racist content, it may be referred to the Bundesprfstelle fr jugendgefhrdende Medien BPjM who may opt to place it on the Index upon which the game may not be sold openly or advertised in the open media. It is considered a felony to supply these games to a child. Japan C label for ages 15 and up The Computer Entertainment Rating Organization CERO that rates video games and PC games except dating sims , visual novels , and eroge  in Japan with levels of rating that informs the customer of the nature of the product and for what age group it is suitable. It was established in July 2002 as a branch of Computer Entertainment Suppliers Association , and became an officially recognized non-profit organization in 2003. These ratings are A  All ages B  Ages 12 and over C  Ages 15 and over D  Ages 17 and over Z  Ages 18 and over Commercial aspects Game sales See also Video game industry , List of best-selling video games , and Golden age of arcade video games A retail display with a large selection of games for platforms popular in the early 2000s According to the market research firm SuperData, as of May 2015, the global games market was worth US74.2 billion. By region, North America accounted for 23.6 billion, Asia for 23.1 billion, Europe for 22.1 billion and South America for 4.5 billion. By market segment, mobile games were worth 22.3 billion, retail games 19.7 billion, free-to-play MMOs 8.7 billion, social games 7.9 billion, PC DLC 7.5 billion, and other categories 3 billion or less each. 112  113  In the United States, also according to SuperData, the share of video games in the entertainment market grew from 5 in 1985 to 13 in 2015, becoming the third-largest market segment behind broadcast and cable television. The research firm anticipated that Asia would soon overtake North America as the largest video game market due to the strong growth of free-to-play and mobile games. 113  Sales of different types of games vary widely between countries due to local preferences. Japanese consumers tend to purchase much more handheld games than console games and especially PC games , with a strong preference for games catering to local tastes. 114  115  Another key difference is that, despite the decline of arcades in the West , arcade games remain an important sector of the Japanese gaming industry . 116  In South Korea , computer games are generally preferred over console games, especially MMORPG games and real-time strategy games. Computer games are also popular in China. 117  Conventions See also List of gaming conventions The gamescom fair in Cologne Gaming conventions are an important showcase of the industry. The annual gamescom in Cologne in August is the worlds leading expo for video games in attendance. 118  The E3 in June in Los Angeles is also of global importance, but is an event for industry insiders only. 119  The Tokyo Game Show in September is the main fair in Asia. Other notable conventions and trade fairs include Brasil Game Show in October, Paris Games Week in OctoberNovember, EB Games Expo Australia in October, KRI , ChinaJoy in July and the annual Game Developers Conference . Some publishers, developers and technology producers also host their own regular conventions, with BlizzCon , QuakeCon , Nvision and the X shows being prominent examples. Esports Main article Esports Short for electronic sports, are video game competitions played most by professional players individually or in teams that gained popularity from the late 2000s, the most common genres are fighting , first-person shooter FPS, multiplayer online battle arena MOBA and real-time strategy . There are certain games that are made for just competitive multiplayer purposes. With those type of games, players focus entirely on choosing the right character or obtaining the right equipment in the game to help them when facing other players. Tournaments are held so that people in the area or from different regions can play against other players of the same game and see who is the best. Major League Gaming MLG is a company that reports tournaments that are held across the country. The players that compete in these tournaments are given a rank depending on their skill level in the game that they choose to play in and face other players that play that game. The players that also compete are mostly called professional players for the fact that they have played the game they are competing in for many, long hours. Those players have been able to come up with different strategies for facing different characters. The professional players are able to pick a character to their liking and be able to master how to use that character very effectively. With strategy games , players tend to know how to get resources quick and are able to make quick decisions about where their troops are to be deployed and what kind of troops to create. Copyright of video games Main article Copyright and video games Creators will nearly always copyright their games. Laws that define copyright, and the rights that are conveyed over a video game vary from country to country. Usually a fair use copyright clause allows consumers some ancillary rights, such as for a player of the game to stream a game online. This is a vague area in copyright law, as these laws predate the advent of video games. This means that rightsholders often must define what they will allow a consumer to do with the video game. Museums Gaming consoles at the Computer Games Museum in Berlin There are many video game museums around the world, including the National Videogame Museum in Frisco, Texas , 120  which serves as the largest museum wholly dedicated to the display and preservation of the industrys most important artifacts. 121  Europe hosts video game museums such as the Computer Games Museum in Berlin 122  and the Museum of Soviet Arcade Machines in Moscow and Saint-Petersburg. 123  124  The Museum of Art and Digital Entertainment in Oakland, California is a dedicated video game museum focusing on playable exhibits of console and computer games. 125  The Video Game Museum of Rome is also dedicated to preserving video games and their history. 126  The International Center for the History of Electronic Games at The Strong in Rochester, New York contains one of the largest collections of electronic games and game-related historical materials in the world, including a 5,000-square-foot 460  m 2  exhibit which allows guests to play their way through the history of video games. 127  128  129  The Smithsonian Institution in Washington, DC has three video games on permanent display Pac-Man , Dragons Lair , and Pong . 130  The Museum of Modern Art has added a total of 20 video games and one video game console to its permanent Architecture and Design Collection since 2012. 131  132  In 2012, the Smithsonian American Art Museum ran an exhibition on  The Art of Video Games . 133  However, the reviews of the exhibit were mixed, including questioning whether video games belong in an art museum. 134  135  See also Video games portal Book Video game Lists of video games List of accessories to video games by system Outline of video games Video game addiction Video game collecting Notes  Newzoo Key Numbers . Newzoo . Archived from the original on 9 May 2019 . Retrieved 20 May 2019 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  U.S. Patent 2,455,992  a b c Welcome to Pong-Story  Introduction . PONG-Story.com. Archived from the original on 27 August 2010 . Retrieved 24 October 2007 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Welcome to... NIMROD . Archived from the original on 23 July 2011 . Retrieved 24 October 2007 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Winter, David. A.S.Douglas 1952 Noughts and Crosses game . PONG-Story. Archived from the original on 23 December 2015 . Retrieved 3 July 2009 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Rabin, Steve 2005 14 June 2005. Introduction to Game Development . Massachusetts Charles River Media. ISBN   978-1-58450-377-4 .  Marvin Yagoda 2008. 1972 Nutting Associates Computer Space . Archived from the original on 28 December 2008.  Orlando, Greg 15 May 2007. Console Portraits A 40-Year Pictorial History of Gaming . Wired News . Archived from the original on 16 May 2008 . Retrieved 24 October 2007 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   History of Gaming  Interactive Timeline of Game History . PBS . Archived from the original on 18 February 2006 . Retrieved 25 October 2007 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Miller, Michael 1 April 2005. A History of Home Video Game Consoles . InformIT . Archived from the original on 12 October 2007 . Retrieved 25 October 2007 .  a b Whittaker, Jason 2004. The cyberspace handbook . Routledge . p.  122. ISBN   978-0-415-16835-9  Kent, Steven L. 2001. The Ultimate History of Video Games From Pong to Pokmon . Three Rivers Press . p.  500. ISBN   978-0-7615-3643-7 .  Edge Staff 13 August 2007. The 30 Defining Moments in Gaming . Edge . Future plc . Archived from the original on 29 October 2011 . Retrieved 18 September 2008 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Atari Offers Largest Game Library PDF . Electronic Games . Vol.  1 no.  1. Winter 1981. pp.  4041 41. Archived PDF from the original on 19 March 2012 . Retrieved 1 February 2012 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Players Guide To Electronic Science Fiction Games . Electronic Games . Vol.  1 no.  2. March 1982. pp.  3545 36. Archived from the original on 2 April 2012 . Retrieved 1 February 2012 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   The Definitive Space Invaders . Retro Gamer . No.  41. Imagine Publishing . September 2007. pp.  2433. Archived from the original on 16 March 2012 . Retrieved 20 April 2011 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Nick Montfort  Ian Bogost 2009. Racing the beam the Atari Video computer system . MIT Press . p.  66. ISBN   978-0-262-01257-7 . Archived from the original on 14 April 2016 . Retrieved 1 May 2011 Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   Jason Whittaker 2004. The cyberspace handbook . Routledge . pp.  122113. ISBN   978-0-415-16835-9  Consalvo, Mia 2006. Console video games and global corporations Creating a hybrid culture PDF . New Media  Society . 8 1 117137. doi  10.11771461444806059921 . Archived from the original PDF on 28 February 2008.  Arnie Katz Bill Kunkel Joyce Worley August 1988. Video Gaming World. Computer Gaming World . p.  44. Im sure youve noticed that Ive made no reference to the Nintendo craze that has repeated the Atari and Mattel Phenomenon of 8 years ago. Thats because for American game designers the Nintendo is a non-event virtually all the work to date has been done in Japan. Only the future will tell if the design process ever crosses the Pacific as efficiently as the container ships and the letters of credit now do.  Blake, Jimmy 6 January 2019. How the UK became a major player in the gaming world . BBC News . Archived from the original on 7 January 2019 . Retrieved 7 January 2019 . The gaming industry as it now exists formed around the same time back in the late 70s early 80s - there were a small number of influential people in programming. Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   Sinclair Spectrum designer Rick Dickinson dies in US . BBC News . 26 April 2018. Archived from the original on 27 April 2018 . Retrieved 27 April 2018 . the machines had spawned a generation of coders that had helped to establish the UKs reputation as a creative, game-making powerhouse Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   Kelion, Leo 23 April 2012. Sinclairs ZX Spectrum turns 30 . BBC News . Archived from the original on 27 April 2018 . Retrieved 26 April 2018 . The success was also driven by videogame sales - the machines were originally marketed as an educational tool but you ensured titles were ready at launch. Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   ORegan, Gerard 21 June 2016. Introduction to the History of Computing A Computing History Primer . Springer. ISBN   978-3-319-33138-6 . Archived from the original on 27 June 2018 . Retrieved 7 January 2019 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   platform  Definitions from Dictionary.com . Dictionary.com . Archived from the original on 7 November 2007 . Retrieved 3 November 2007 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Olle, David Westcott, Jean Riescher 2018. Video Game Addiction . Stylus Publishing, LLC. p.  16. ISBN   978-1-937585-84-6 . Archived from the original on 9 August 2018 . Retrieved 9 August 2018 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   Lane, Rick 13 December 2011. Is PC Gaming Really More Expensive Than Consoles . Archived from the original on 13 August 2016 . Retrieved 9 August 2016 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   a b CryptoKitties craze slows down transactions on Ethereum . 12 May 2017. Archived from the original on 12 January 2018. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Apperley, Thomas H. 2006. Genre and game studies PDF . Simulation  Gaming . 37 1 623. doi  10.11771046878105282278 . Archived from the original PDF on 5 October 2013 . Retrieved 19 April 2013 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   Adams, Ernest 9 July 2009. Background The Origins of Game Genres . Gamasutra . Archived from the original on 17 December 2014 . Retrieved 3 December 2014 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Adams, Ernest Andrew Rollings 2006. Fundamentals of Game Design . Prentice Hall. p.  67. ISBN   978-0-13-343571-9 .  Harteveld, Casper 2011. Triadic Game Design Balancing Reality, Meaning and Play . Springer Science  Business Media. p.  71. ISBN   978-1-84996-157-8 . Retrieved 19 December 2014 .  How Virtual Reality Military Applications Work . 27 August 2007. Archived from the original on 7 January 2010 . Retrieved 24 November 2009 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Anne Derryberry, Definition of Serious games Archived 5 November 2015 at the Wayback Machine Adobe.com August 2007  Serious Games in Virtual Worlds The Future of Enterprise Business Intelligence . Archived from the original on 16 November 2008 . Retrieved 24 November 2009 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Using Second Life As A Business-To-Business Tool . Archived from the original on 12 May 2009 . Retrieved 24 November 2009 .    Newsgames Procedural Rhetoric meets Political Cartoons by Mike Treanor and Michael Mateas PDF . Archived from the original PDF on 4 March 2011. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   TAKE ACTION games . Archived from the original on 26 May 2010 . Retrieved 9 August 2016 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Educate to Innovate  The White House . Whitehouse.gov. Archived from the original on 4 May 2010. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   President Obama Launches Educate to Innovate Campaign for Excellence in Science, Technology, Engineering  Math Stem Education  The White House . Whitehouse.gov. 23 November 2009. Archived from the original on 8 March 2015. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Video Game Competitions to Expand Stem Learning in the United States . District of Columbia Prnewswire.com. Archived from the original on 26 November 2009. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Imagine Cup Student Competition  Support FAQs . 22 August 2008. Archived from the original on 22 August 2008.  Educational Games . Nobelprize.org. Archived from the original on 5 August 2010. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   The Edge of Reason . eurogamer.net. 3 August 2009. Archived from the original on 19 November 2009 . Retrieved 16 November 2009 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Assassins Creed II dev team triples in size , Christopher Reynolds, 18 May 2009, NOW Gamer. Archived 15 May 2016 at the Portuguese Web Archive  Schreier, Jason. The Messy, True Story Behind The Making Of Destiny . Kotaku . Archived from the original on 15 November 2016 . Retrieved 15 November 2016 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Downloadable Content Concept . Archived from the original on 1 August 2011 . Retrieved 23 July 2011 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  , Giant Bomb.  Archived copy . Archived from the original on 5 January 2011 . Retrieved 23 July 2011 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  CS1 maint archived copy as title  link  CS1 maint unfit url  link  , Bethesda.  Gilbert, Ben 11 April 2011. Call of Duty Black Ops Escalation DLC drops on Xbox 360 May 3 . Joystiq . Archived from the original on 1 February 2015 . Retrieved 21 September 2017 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Hollywood Reporter interviewing Doug Lombardi, Quote Mods absolutely helped us drive huge sales to Half-Life . Archived from the original on 6 May 2008 . Retrieved 10 August 2009 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  CS1 maint unfit url  link  .  Vargas, Jose Antonio 28 August 2006. In Game World, Cheaters Proudly Prosper . Washington Post . Archived from the original on 20 August 2011 . Retrieved 24 October 2007 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   a b 1UP Staff. Cracking the Code The Konami Code . 1UP.com . Archived from the original on 22 May 2011 . Retrieved 24 October 2007 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   a b c Rybka, Jason. Video Game Cheats and Codes  What Are Cheat Codes . About.com . Archived from the original on 15 October 2007 . Retrieved 24 October 2007 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Rybka, Jason. Why Use Cheats and Codes for Console and PC Games . About.com. Archived from the original on 17 October 2007 . Retrieved 24 October 2007 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help    Easter egg Definition . dictionary.com . Archived from the original on 19 June 2015 . Retrieved 18 June 2015 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Wolf, Mark J.P. 2012. Encyclopedia of Video Games The Culture, Technology, and Art of Gaming . ABC-CLIO. p.  177. ISBN   978-0-313-37936-9 .  Bjrk, Staffan Holopainen, Jussi 2005. Patterns In Game Design Archived 5 May 2016 at the Wayback Machine . Charles River Media. p. 235. ISBN   978-1-58450-354-5 . Retrieved 25 January 2013.  Murray 1998 .  Aarseth, Espen J. 21 May 2004. Genre Trouble . Electronic Book Review. Archived from the original on 19 June 2006 . Retrieved 14 June 2006 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   IGN GDC 2004 Warren Spector Talks Games Narrative . Xbox.ign.com. Archived from the original on 11 April 2009. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Nintendo Anti-Piracy  Frequently Asked Questions FAQs . Archived from the original on 19 October 2013 . Retrieved 9 August 2016 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Here are the new backwards-compatible Xbox 360 games on Xbox One . 17 December 2015. Archived from the original on 21 July 2016 . Retrieved 9 August 2016 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Sony Wants Your Input on PS2 Emulation Games for PS4 . 16 December 2015. Archived from the original on 21 July 2016 . Retrieved 9 August 2016 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Sony Computer Entertainment America v. Bleem, 214 F. 3d 1022 . 9th Circuit 2000. Google Scholar . Court of Appeals published 4 May 2000. 14 February 2000 . Retrieved 15 June 2016 .  Legal Information Copyrights, Emulators, ROMs, etc. . Nintendo of America, Inc. Archived from the original on 18 June 2016 . Retrieved 16 June 2016 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Guy, Hannah 2007. Women video gamers Not just solitaire . PC World Canada . Archived from the original on 12 March 2007.  Gaming while black Casual racism to cautious optimism . Engadget . Archived from the original on 8 March 2016 . Retrieved 16 February 2016 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   ESA. Game Player Data . Archived from the original on 26 June 2011. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Sliwinski, Alexander 10 June 2006. First-ever survey of gay videogamers . Washington Blade . Archived from the original on 18 June 2006.  Sliwinski, Alexander 8 June 2006. Gay video game player survey . In Newsweekly. Archived from the original on 1 January 2009.  Sliwinski, Alexander. Gay gamer survey results with large hetero inclusion . Joystiq. Archived from the original on 22 September 2013 . Retrieved 16 July 2011 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Sliwinski, Alexander 8 October 2009. New gaymer survey explores sexual identity, interest in games . Joystiq.com. Archived from the original on 29 June 2011 . Retrieved 16 July 2011 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Fahey, Mike 8 October 2009. What Do Gay Gamers Want From Their Games . Kotaku.com. Archived from the original on 27 February 2013. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Hyman, Jamie 3 September 2009. Orlando student conducts gay gamer survey . Orlando Watermark. Archived from the original on 1 November 2012. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   91 Of Kids Aged 217 Playing Video Games, Says Report . Archived from the original on 12 October 2011 . Retrieved 12 October 2011 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   EVE Online smashes PCU record during anniversary celebrations . massively.joystiq.com. Archived from the original on 28 January 2015 . Retrieved 1 January 2015 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Green, C. Shawn  Bavelier, Daphne 2003. Action video game modifies visual selective attention. Nature . 423 6939 534537. doi  10.1038nature01647 . PMID   12774121 . Green  Bavelier.  Gladwell, Malcolm 9 May 2005. Brain Candy . The New Yorker . Archived from the original on 9 May 2009. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Daphne Bavelier et al. 2003. Action video game modifies visual selective attention PDF . NatureUniversity of Rochester. Archived from the original PDF on 29 March 2006 . Retrieved 29 April 2006 .  Gee, James Paul 2003. What Video Games Have to Teach us About Literacy and Learning . Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN   978-1-4039-6169-3 .  James Paul Gee et al. 2007. Wired 11.05 View . Codenet, Inc. Archived from the original on 17 May 2008 . Retrieved 4 December 2007 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Glazer, S. 2006. Video games. CQ Researcher . 16  937960. cqresrre2006111000.  iRobot Receives New Military Orders 14 PackBot Robots . 2007. Archived from the original on 26 September 2007 . Retrieved 25 July 2007 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Playing Video Games Offers Learning Across Life Span Archived 16 September 2008 at the Wayback Machine Newswise. Retrieved 17 August 2008.  Woldorf De Lisi, Jennifer Richard 2002. Improving Childrens Mental Rotation Accuracy With Computer Game Playing. The Journal of Genetic Psychology . 163 3 272282. doi  10.108000221320209598683 . PMID   12230149 .  a b Boot WR, Blakely DP, Simons DJ 2011. Do action video games improve perception and cognition . Front Psychol . 2  226. doi  10.3389fpsyg.2011.00226 . PMC   3171788 . PMID   21949513 .  Green CS, Bavelier D March 2012. Learning, attentional control, and action video games . Curr. Biol . 22 6 R197206. doi  10.1016j.cub.2012.02.012 . PMC   3461277 . PMID   22440805 .  Chisholm, Hickey, Theeuwes and Kingston, 2010  Video Games and the Supreme Court Lessons for the scientific community in the wake of Brown v EMA, 2011 PDF . American Psychological Association . March 2013. Archived PDF from the original on 27 December 2013. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Freedman J. Media violence and its effect on aggression assessing the scientific evidence. University of Toronto Press , Toronto 2002 ISBN   0-8020-8425-7 .  Wood, Wendy Wong, Frank Y. Chachere, J. Gregory 1 May 1991. Effects of media violence on viewers aggression in unconstrained social interaction . Psychological Bulletin . 109 3 371383. doi  10.10370033-2909.109.3.371 . ISSN   1939-1455 . Archived from the original on 25 July 2016 . Retrieved 28 November 2016 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   Wakefield, Jane 2 January 2018. Gaming addiction classified as disorder . BBC News . Archived from the original on 29 June 2018 . Retrieved 23 June 2018 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   Makuch, Eddie 2 January 2018.   Gaming Disorder Is An Actual Disease, World Health Organization Says . GameSpot . Archived from the original on 20 June 2018 . Retrieved 23 June 2018 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   a b Gabbiadini, Alessandro Riva, Paolo 2018. The lone gamer Social exclusion predicts violent video game preferences and fuels aggressive inclinations in adolescent players. Aggressive Behavior . 44 2 113124. doi  10.1002ab.21735 . PMID   29052252 .  Gibbs, Samuel 8 August 2016. Positive link between video games and academic performance, study suggests . The Guardian . London, UK. Archived from the original on 8 August 2016 . Retrieved 9 August 2016 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Scutti, Susan 8 August 2016. Teen gamers do better at math than social media stars, study says . CNN Health . Archived from the original on 13 August 2016 . Retrieved 9 August 2016 . Video games bad reputation may be unfair. Teens who were regular gamers scored higher than average in math, reading and science on an international exam, a new study found. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Griffiths, Mark 2010. Online video gaming what should education psychologists know. Education Psychology in Practice . 26 1 3540. doi  10.108002667360903522769 .  permanent dead link   Hsieh R, Lee W and Lin J, The Impact Of Short-Term Video Games On Performance Among Children With Developmental Delays A Randomized Controlled Trial 2016 11 PLOS ONE  a b c d Self-Determination Theory Deci and Ryan . Learning Theories . 16 July 2014. Archived from the original on 24 January 2018 . Retrieved 11 April 2018 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   a b c Nebel, Steve Schneider, Sascha Schledjewski, Janine Rey, Gnter Daniel 2017. Goal-Setting in Educational Video Games. Simulation  Gaming . 48 1 98130. doi  10.11771046878116680869 .  a b c Adachi, Paul J.C. Willoughby, Teena 1 September 2017. The Link Between Playing Video Games and Positive Youth Outcomes. Child Development Perspectives . 11 3 202206. doi  10.1111cdep.12232 . ISSN   1750-8606 .  The Psychology of Video Game Avatars . The Psychology of Video Games . 29 November 2013. Archived from the original on 19 April 2018 . Retrieved 11 April 2018 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Mihara, Satoko Higuchi, Susumu 2017. Cross-sectional and longitudinal epidemiological studies of Internet gaming disorder A systematic review of the literature. Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences . 71 7 425444. doi  10.1111pcn.12532 . PMID   28436212 .  Stockdale, Laura Coyne, Sarah M. 1 January 2018. Video game addiction in emerging adulthood Cross-sectional evidence of pathology in video game addicts as compared to matched healthy controls . Journal of Affective Disorders . 225  265272. doi  10.1016j.jad.2017.08.045 . ISSN   0165-0327 . PMID   28841491 .  Kim, Heesung Ke, Fengfeng 2017. Effects of game-based learning in an OpenSim-supported virtual environment on mathematical performance. Interactive Learning Environments . 25 4 543557. doi  10.108010494820.2016.1167744 .  How playing video games could get you a better job . BBC News . 30 August 2019.  Fogel VA, Miltenberger RG, Graves R, Koehler S 2010. The effects of exergaming on physical activity among inactive children in a physical education classroom . Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis . 43 4 591600. doi  10.1901jaba.2010.43-591 . PMC   2998252 . PMID   21541146 .  Sanders GJ, Rebold M, Peacock CA, Williamson ML, Santo AS, Barkley JE 1 July 2014. The Physiologic and Behavioral Implications of Playing Active and Sedentary Video Games in a Seated and Standing Position . International Journal of Exercise Science . 7 3 194201. PMC   4831859 . PMID   27182403 .  McCauley, Dennis. The Political Game A Brief History of Video Game Legislation . joystiq.com . joystiq.com. Archived from the original on 24 December 2012 . Retrieved 20 January 2013 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Classification Guidelines Introduction . British Board of Film Classification. Archived from the original on 25 May 2011 . Retrieved 23 November 2011 . The BBFC classifies video works which are released as video recordings under the Video Recordings Act 1984. The video games covered by the VRA are those whose exemption is forfeited under section 22 because they depict human sexual activity, gross violence or other matters of concern.  Pan European Game Information in German. Bundesstelle fr die Positivprdikatisierung von Computer- und Konsolenspielen. Archived from the original on 17 September 2013 . Retrieved 23 November 2011 . Eine Kennzeichung mit der PEGI-Altersempfehlung ist in Wien seit April 2008 verpflichtend Es drfen nur Spiele verkauft werden, die eine PEGI-Kennzeichnung tragen. Und es drfen die Spiele nur an Jugendliche verkauft werden, wenn diese zumindest das Alter gem PEGI-Kennzeichung erreicht haben. Bis Ende 2009 gilt in der bergangsfrist alternativ auch die Kennzeichnung der USK.  Newman, Heather 20 May 2015. Games poised to outstrip broadcast TV revenues, SuperData finds . VentureBeat . Archived from the original on 2 June 2015 . Retrieved 31 May 2015 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   a b SuperData Research May 2015. Global Games Market Report May 2015 . Archived from the original on 24 May 2015. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Ashcraft, Brian 18 January 2013. Why PC Gaming Is Still Niche in Japan . Kotaku . Archived from the original on 23 June 2018 . Retrieved 23 June 2018 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   Byford, Sam 20 March 2014. Japan used to rule video games, so what happened . The Verge . Archived from the original on 23 June 2018 . Retrieved 23 June 2018 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   Lewis, Leo 9 February 2017. Game on why Japans arcades are still winning . Financial Times . Archived from the original on 27 December 2017 . Retrieved 26 December 2017 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Usher, William 11 March 2012. PC Game Sales Top 18.6 Billion In 2011 . Gaming Blend . Cinema Blend. Archived from the original on 9 June 2012 . Retrieved 17 March 2012 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Tatr, Susanna 14 August 2014. How NVIDIA Will Be Going Big at Gamescom, the Worlds Biggest Gaming Show . Nvidia. Archived from the original on 17 September 2014 . Retrieved 17 September 2014 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   E3 is Obsolete, But it Doesnt Matter . Forbes . 8 June 2012. Archived from the original on 23 January 2013 . Retrieved 18 October 2012 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   National Videogame Museum . nvmusa.org. Archived from the original on 2 December 2017. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Fox 4 News . Fox4news.com. Archived from the original on 7 November 2017. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Computerspielemuseum  Berlin . Computerspielemuseum.de. Archived from the original on 1 May 2011. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Museum of Soviet arcade machines . 15kop.ru. Archived from the original on 28 January 2010. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Red Penguin Review of the Museum of Soviet arcade machines . redpenguin.net. Archived from the original on 21 September 2013 . Retrieved 1 June 2013 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   About The MADE . themade.org. Archived from the original on 30 May 2013. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   ViGaMus . vigamus.com. Archived from the original on 13 December 2012. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Wolf, Mark J.P., ed. 2012. International Center for the History of Electronic Games ICHEG. Encyclopedia of Video Games The Culture, Technology, and Art of Gaming . p.  329.  Jacobs, Stephen 22 November 2010. Strongs eGameRevolution Exhibit Gives Game History Its First Permanent Home . Gamasutra . Archived from the original on 12 May 2013 . Retrieved 26 May 2013 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   eGameRevolution . International Center for the History of Electronic Games. Archived from the original on 27 May 2013 . Retrieved 26 May 2013 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   History of Computing Video games  Golden Age . thocp.net . Archived from the original on 26 December 2011. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Anttonelli, Paola 29 November 2012. Video Games 14 in the Collection, for Starters . MoMA . Archived from the original on 8 September 2015. Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   Galloway, Paul 23 June 2013. Video Games Seven More Building Blocks in MoMAs Collection . MoMA . Archived from the original on 8 September 2015. Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   Exhibitions The Art of Video Games  American Art . Americanart.si.edu. Archived from the original on 10 January 2011 . Retrieved 8 July 2012 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Barron, Christina 29 April 2012. Museum exhibit asks Is it art if you push start . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 4 June 2013 . Retrieved 12 February 2013 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Kennicott, Philip 18 March 2012. The Art of Video Games . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 4 June 2013 . Retrieved 12 February 2013 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  References .mw-parser-output .refbeginfont-size90margin-bottom0.5em.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indentsullist-style-typenonemargin-left0.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indentsulli,.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indentsdlddmargin-left0padding-left3.2emtext-indent-3.2emlist-stylenone.mw-parser-output .refbegin-100font-size100 Blodget, Henry 12 April 2005. How to Solve Chinas Piracy Problem . Slate.com . Retrieved 12 February 2006 . Costikyan, Greg 1994. I Have No Words  I Must Design . Archived from the original on 12 August 2008. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  Crawford, Chris 1982. The Art of Computer Game Design . Lieu, Tina August 1997. Where have all the PC games gone . Computing Japan. Archived from the original on 12 January 1998. Murray, Janet 1998. Hamlet on the Holodeck . MIT Press. ISBN   978-0-262-63187-7 . Pursell, Carroll 2015. From Playgrounds to PlayStation The Interaction of Technology and Play. Baltimore, MD Johns Hopkins University Press. Salen, Katie Eric Zimmerman 2005. The Game Design Reader A Rules of Play Anthology . The MIT Press . ISBN   978-0-262-19536-2 . Smuts, Aaron 2005. Are Video Games Art . Winegarner, Beth 28 January 2005. Game sales hit record highs . Gamespot . Retrieved 12 February 2006 . John Wills 1 October 2002. Digital Dinosaurs and Artificial Life Exploring the Culture of Nature in Computer and Video Games. Cultural Values Journal for Cultural Research . 6 4 395417. doi  10.10801362517022000047334 . Williams, J.P.,  Smith, J.H., eds. 2007. The players realm studies on the culture of video games and gaming. Jefferson, NC McFarland  Co. External links video games at Wikipedias sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Wikimedia Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Library resources about Video game Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Video games bibliography by the French video game research association Ludoscience The Virtual Museum of Computing VMoC v t e Concepts of video games Glossary of video game terms Attributes Health Life Experience point Magic Mechanics Item Power-up HUD Warp Fast travel Fog of war Invisible wall Cutscene Mini-map Paper doll Destructible environment Loading screen Replay value Saved game Scripted sequence Password Line of sight Critical hit Level Permadeath Status effect Hitbox Movement techniques Rocket jumping Strafe-jumping Strafing Trickjump Modes Player type Single-player Multiplayer Cooperative Competitive gameplay Esports Speedrun Gameplay type Capture the flag CTF Deathmatch Last man standing v t e Video game genres  List  Action Beat em up Hack and slash Fighting Maze Pac-Man clone Platform Shooter First-person MMOFPS Third-person Light gun Shoot em up Tactical Survival Battle royale Action-adventure Grand Theft Auto clone Immersive sim Metroidvania Stealth Survival horror Psychological horror Adventure Escape the room Interactive fiction Interactive movie Visual novel Role-playing Action role-playing Dungeon crawl MMORPG MUD Roguelike Tactical role-playing Simulation Construction and management Business City Government Life simulation Dating sim Digital pet God Social simulation Sports Strategy 4X Multiplayer online battle arena Real-time strategy Tower defense Time management MMORTS Real-time tactics Turn-based strategy Turn-based tactics Wargame Grand strategy wargame Vehicle simulation Flight simulator Amateur Combat Space Racing Kart racing Sim racing Submarine simulator Train simulator Vehicular combat Other genres Artillery Breakout clone Deck-building Roguelike deck-building Digital collectible card game Eroge Exergame Incremental Music Rhythm Non-game Party Programming Puzzle Sokoban Tile-matching Related concepts AAA game Advertising Arcade game Art game Audio game Casual game Christian game Crossover game Educational game FMV Gamification Indie game Multiplayer video game Nonlinear gameplay Open world Nonviolent video game Online game Browser game Multiplayer online game Online gambling Social-network game Pervasive game Serious game Toys-to-life Twitch gameplay Video game clone Video games portal v t e History of video games By system Golden age of arcade video games Timeline of arcade video game history Video game crash of 1983 Early mainframe games By year Early history 19471972 1970s 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980s 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990s 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000s 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010s 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020s 2020 Near future By console generation First 19721980 Second 19761992 Third 19832003 Fourth 19872003 Fifth 19932005 Sixth 19982013 Seventh 20052017 Eighth 2012 By region Australia Bangladesh Belgium Brazil Canada China Czech Republic Colombia Finland France Germany Ghana India Indonesia Ireland Lithuania Japan Kenya Malaysia Netherlands New Zealand Nigeria Philippines Russia South Africa South Korea Thailand Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom United States v t e Types of games Chance Guessing Party Role-playing Skill Sport Strategy Street Tabletop Video List of types of games Authority control GND  4010457-6 LCCN  sh85143202 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleVideo_game oldid914479543  Categories  Digital media Video games Hidden categories CS1 errors deprecated parameters Articles with inconsistent citation formats Webarchive template wayback links Webarchive template other archives CS1 maint archived copy as title CS1 maint unfit url All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 German-language sources de Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use dmy dates from May 2019 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2009 Articles with limited geographic scope from September 2017 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from August 2009 Articles prone to spam from October 2013 Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers