WikipediaVerifiability From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Wikipedia policy on verifiability of information WPV redirects here. To discuss particular sources, see the reliable sources noticeboard . For vandalism, see WPVD . For the default Wikipedia skin, see WPVECTOR . This page documents an English Wikipedia policy . It describes a widely accepted standard that all editors should normally follow. Changes made to it should reflect consensus . .mw-parser-output .module-shortcutboxplainfloatrightborder1px solid aaabackgroundfffmargin0 0 0 1empadding0.3em 0.6em 0.2em 0.6emtext-aligncenterfont-size85font-weightbold.mw-parser-output .module-shortcutlistdisplayinline-blockborder-bottom1px solid aaamargin-bottom0.2emfont-weightnormal.mw-parser-output .module-shortcutanchordivpositionrelative top-3em.mw-parser-output li .module-shortcutanchordivfloatright Shortcuts WPV WPVER WPVERIFY This page in a nutshell Readers must be able to check that any of the information within Wikipedia articles is not just made up. This means all material must be attributable to reliable, published sources. Additionally, quotations and any material challenged or likely to be challenged must be supported by inline citations . Core content policies Neutral point of view No original research Verifiability Other content policies Article titles Biographies of living persons Image use policy What Wikipedia is not v t e In Wikipedia , verifiability means other people using the encyclopedia can check that the information comes from a reliable source . Wikipedia does not publish original research . Its content is determined by previously published information rather than the beliefs or experiences of editors. Even if youre sure something is true, it must be verifiable before you can add it. 1  If reliable sources disagree, then maintain a neutral point of view and present what the various sources say, giving each side its due weight . All material in Wikipedia mainspace , including everything in articles, lists and captions, must be verifiable. All quotations, and any material whose verifiability has been challenged or is likely to be challenged, must include an inline citation that directly supports the material. Any material that needs a source but does not have one may be removed. Please immediately remove contentious material about living people that is unsourced or poorly sourced. For how to write citations, see citing sources . Verifiability, no original research , and neutral point of view are Wikipedias core content policies. They work together to determine content, so editors should understand the key points of all three. Articles must also comply with the copyright policy . Contents 1 Responsibility for providing citations 2 Reliable sources 2.1 What counts as a reliable source 2.2 Newspaper and magazine blogs 2.3 Reliable sources noticeboard and guideline 3 Sources that are usually not reliable 3.1 Questionable sources 3.2 Self-published sources 3.3 Self-published or questionable sources as sources on themselves 3.4 Wikipedia and sources that mirror or use it 4 Accessibility 4.1 Access to sources 4.2 Non-English sources 4.2.1 Citing 4.2.2 Quoting 5 Other issues 5.1 Verifiability does not guarantee inclusion 5.2 Tagging a sentence, section, or article 5.3 Exceptional claims require exceptional sources 6 Verifiability and other principles 6.1 Copyright and plagiarism 6.2 Neutrality 6.3 Notability 6.4 Original research 7 See also 7.1 Guidelines 7.2 Information pages 7.3 Resources 7.4 Essays 8 Notes 9 Further reading Responsibility for providing citations Policy shortcuts WPUNSOURCED WPCHALLENGE WPBURDEN WPPROVEIT WPBURDEN redirects here. For the responsibility to get consensus on content inclusion, see WPONUS . WPPROVEIT redirects here. For the editing tool, see WikipediaProveIt . See also WikipediaEditing policy   Try to fix problems All content must be verifiable. The burden to demonstrate verifiability lies with the editor who adds or restores material , and it is satisfied by providing an inline citation to a reliable source that directly supports 2  the contribution. 3  Attribute all quotations and any material whose verifiability is challenged or likely to be challenged to a reliable, published source using an inline citation . The cited source must clearly support the material as presented in the article. Cite the source clearly and precisely specifying page, section, or such divisions as may be appropriate. See Citing sources for details of how to do this. Any material lacking a reliable source directly supporting it may be removed and should not be restored without an inline citation to a reliable source. Whether and how quickly material should be initially removed for not having an inline citation to a reliable source depends on the material and the overall state of the article. In some cases, editors may object if you remove m aterial without giving them time to provide references consider adding a citation needed tag as an interim step. 4  When tagging or removing material for lacking an inline citation, please state your concern that it may not be possible to find a published reliable source and the material therefore may not be verifiable. 5  If you think the material is verifiable, you are encouraged to provide an inline citation yourself before considering whether to remove or tag it. Do not leave unsourced or poorly sourced material in an article if it might damage the reputation of living people 6  or existing groups, and do not move it to the talk page. You should also be aware of how the BLP policy applies to groups . Reliable sources Policy shortcuts WPSOURCE WPSOURCES WPSOURCE redirects here. For the source  tag, see WikipediaSyntax highlighting . For how to reference sources, see HelpReferencing for beginners . What counts as a reliable source Further information WikipediaReliable sources The word source when citing sources on Wikipedia has three related meanings The piece of work itself the article, book The creator of the work the writer, journalist The publisher of the work for example, Random House or Cambridge University Press  All three can affect reliability. Articles must be based on reliable, independent , published sources with a reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. Source material must have been published , the definition of which for our purposes is made available to the public in some form. 7  Unpublished materials are not considered reliable. Use sources that directly support the material presented in an article and are appropriate to the claims made. The appropriateness of any source depends on the context. The best sources have a professional structure in place for checking or analyzing facts, legal issues, evidence, and arguments. The greater the degree of scrutiny given to these issues, the more reliable the source. Be especially careful when sourcing content related to living people or medicine . If available, academic and peer-reviewed publications are usually the most reliable sources, such as in history, medicine, and science. Editors may also use material from reliable non-academic sources, particularly if it appears in respected mainstream publications. Other reliable sources include University-level textbooks Books published by respected publishing houses Magazines Journals Mainstream newspapers Editors may also use electronic media, subject to the same criteria. See details in WikipediaIdentifying reliable sources and WikipediaSearch engine test . Newspaper and magazine blogs Policy shortcut WPNEWSBLOG Several newspapers, magazines, and other news organizations host online columns they call blogs . These may be acceptable sources if the writers are professionals, but use them with caution because blogs may not be subject to the news organizations normal fact-checking process. 8  If a news organization publishes an opinion piece in a blog, attribute the statement to the writer, e.g. Jane Smith wrote   ... Never use as sources the blog comments that are left by readers. For personal or group blogs that are not reliable sources, see Self-published sources below. Reliable sources noticeboard and guideline Further information WikipediaReliable sourcesNoticeboard and WikipediaReliable sources To discuss the reliability of a specific source for a particular statement, consult the reliable sources noticeboard , which seeks to apply this policy to particular cases. For a guideline discussing the reliability of particular types of sources, see WikipediaReliable sources WPRS. In the case of inconsistency between this policy and the WPRS guideline, or any other guideline related to sourcing, this policy has priority. Sources that are usually not reliable WPNOTRELIABLE redirects here. You may be looking for WikipediaWikipedia is not a reliable source . See also WikipediaReliable sources   Questionable and self-published sources , and WikipediaReliable sourcesPerennial sources Policy shortcuts WPNOTRELIABLE WPNOTRS WPQS Questionable sources Questionable sources are those that have a poor reputation for checking the facts, lack meaningful editorial oversight, or have an apparent conflict of interest. 9  Such sources include websites and publications expressing views that are widely considered by other sources to be extremist or promotional, or that rely heavily on unsubstantiated gossip, rumor or personal opinion. Questionable sources should be used only as sources for material on themselves , such as in articles about themselves see below . They are not suitable sources for contentious claims about others. Predatory open access journals are also questionable, due to lack of effective peer-review. Self-published sources Policy shortcuts WPSPS WPSELFPUBLISH WPBLOGS WPUGS Further information WikipediaBiographies of living persons   Avoid self-published sources , WikipediaList of self-publishing companies , and WikipediaIdentifying and using self-published works Anyone can create a personal web page , self-publish a book, or claim to be an expert . That is why self-published material such as books, patents, newsletters, personal websites, open wikis, personal or group blogs as distinguished from newsblogs , above, content farms , internet forum postings, and social media postings are largely not acceptable as sources. Self-published expert sources may be considered reliable when produced by an established expert on the subject matter, whose work in the relevant field has previously been published by reliable , independent publications. 8  Exercise caution when using such sources if the information in question is suitable for inclusion, someone else will probably have published it in independent reliable sources. 10  Never use self-published sources as third-party sources about living people, even if the author is an expert, well-known professional researcher, or writer. Self-published or questionable sources as sources on themselves WPSOCIALMEDIA redirects here. For the policy on what Wikipedia is not, see WPNOTSOCIALNETWORK . WPTWITTER redirects here. For the external links essay, see WPTwitter-EL . Policy shortcuts WPABOUTSELF WPSELFPUB WPTWITTER WPSOCIALMEDIA WPREDDIT Self-published and questionable sources may be used as sources of information about themselves , usually in articles about themselves or their activities, without the self-published source requirement that they be published experts in the field, so long as the material is neither unduly self-serving nor an exceptional claim  it does not involve claims about third parties it does not involve claims about events not directly related to the source there is no reasonable doubt as to its authenticity and the article is not based primarily on such sources. This policy also applies to material published by the subject on social networking websites such as Twitter , Tumblr , Reddit , and Facebook . Wikipedia and sources that mirror or use it Policy shortcuts WPCIRC WPCIRCULAR WPREFLOOP WPCIRCULAR redirects here. For links on a page that redirect back to the same page, see WPSELFRED . See also WPCOPYWITHIN , WikipediaList of citogenesis incidents , and WikipediaCiting Wikipedia Do not use articles from Wikipedia whether this English Wikipedia or Wikipedias in other languages as sources. Also, do not use websites that mirror Wikipedia content or publications that rely on material from Wikipedia as sources. Content from a Wikipedia article is not considered reliable unless it is backed up by citing reliable sources . Confirm that these sources support the content, then use them directly. 11  There is also a risk of circular reference  circular reporting when using a Wikipedia article or derivative work as a source. An exception is allowed when Wikipedia itself is being discussed in the article, which may cite an article, guideline, discussion, statistic, or other content from Wikipedia or a sister project to support a statement about Wikipedia. Wikipedia or the sister project is a primary source in this case, and may be used following the policy for primary sources . Any such use should avoid original research , undue emphasis on Wikipedias role or views, and inappropriate self-reference . The article text should make it clear the material is sourced from Wikipedia so the reader is aware of the potential bias. Accessibility Access to sources Policy shortcuts WPPAYWALL WPSOURCEACCESS See also WikipediaOffline sources , WikipediaWikiProject Resource ExchangeResource Request , and WikipediaReliable sourcesCost Some reliable sources may not be easily accessible. For example, an online source may require payment, and a print-only source may be available only in university libraries. Rare historical sources may even be available only in special museum collections and archives. Do not reject reliable sources just because they are difficult or costly to access. If you have trouble accessi ng a source, others may be able to do so on your behalf see WikiProject Resource Exchange . Non-English sources Policy shortcuts WPRSUE WPNOENG WPNONENG See also WikipediaTranslators available and WikipediaNo original research   Translations and transcriptions Citing Citations to non-English reliable sources are allowed on the English Wikipedia . However, because this project is in English, English-language sources are preferred over non-English ones when available and of equal quality and relevance. As with sources in English, if a dispute arises involving a citation to a non-English source, editors may request a quotation of relevant portions of the original source be provided, either in text, in a footnote, or on t he article talk page. 12  See TemplateRequest quotation . Quoting If you quote a non-English reliable source whether in the main text or in a footnote, a translation into English should always accompany the quote. Translations published by reliable sources are preferred over translations by Wikipedians, but translations by Wikipedians are preferred over machine translations. When using a machine translation of source material, editors shoul d be reasonably certain the translation is accurate and the source is appropriate. Editors should not rely upon machine translations of non-English sources in contentious articles or biographies of living people. If needed, ask an editor who can translate it for you. In articles, the original text is usually included with the translated text when translated by Wikipedians, and the translating editor is usually not cited. When quoting any material, whether in English or in some other language, be careful not to violate copyright  see the fair-use guideline . Other issues Verifiability does not guarantee inclusion Shortcuts WPVNOTSUFF WPONUS WPONUS redirects here. For the responsibility to demonstrate verifiability, see WPBURDEN . See also WPUNDUE , WPPAGEDECIDE , WPPRESERVE , WPSUMMARY , and WPIINFO While information must be verifiable to be included in an article, all verifiable information need not be included in an article. Consensus may determine that certain information does not improve an article, and that it should be omitted or presented instead in a different article . The onus to achieve consensus for inclusion is upon those seeking to include disputed content. Tagging a sentence, section, or article Further information WikipediaCitation needed and WikipediaTemplate messagesSources of articles Shortcut WPFAILEDVERIFICATION If you want to request a source for an unsourced statement, you can tag a sentence with the   citation needed   template by writing   cn   or   fact  . There are other templates here for tagging sections or entire articles. You can also leave a note on the talk page asking for a source, or move the material to the talk page and ask for a source there. To request verification that a reference supports the text, tag it with   verification needed  . Material that fails verification may be tagged with   failed verification   or removed. When using templates to tag material, it is helpful to other editors if you explain your rationale in the template, edit summary, or on the talk page. Take special care with contentious material about living people . If unsourced or poorly sourced it should be removed immediately and not just tagged or moved to the talk page. Exceptional claims require exceptional sources Policy shortcuts WPREDFLAG WPEXCEPTIONAL WPEXTRAORDINARY See also WikipediaFringe theories Any exceptional claim requires multiple high-quality sources. 13  Red flags that should prompt extra caution include surprising or apparently important claims not covered by multiple mainstream sources challenged claims that are supported purely by primary or self-published sources or those with an apparent conflict of interest 9  reports of a statement by someone that seems out of character, or against an interest they had previously defended claims that are contradicted by the prevailing view within the relevant community, or that would significantly alter mainstream assumptions, especially in science, medicine, history, politics, and biographies of living people. This is especially true when proponents say there is a conspiracy to silence them. Verifiability and other principles Copyright and plagiarism Further information WikipediaCopyright , WikipediaPlagiarism , WikipediaCopying within Wikipedia , WikipediaMOS   Attribution , and WikipediaCITE   In-text attribution Policy shortcut WPYTCOPYRIGHT Do not plagiarize or breach copyright when using sources. Summarize source material in your own words as much as possible when quoting or closely paraphrasing a source use an inline citation , and in-text attribution where appropriate. Do not link to any source that violates the copyrights of others per contributors rights and obligations . You can link to websites that display copyrighted works as long as the website has licensed the work, or uses the work in a way compliant with fair use. Knowingly directing others to material that violates copyright may be considered contributory copyright infringement . If there is reason to think a source violates copyright, do not cite it. This is particularly relevant when linking to sites such as Scribd or YouTube , where due care should be taken to avoid linking to material that violates copyright. Neutrality Further information WikipediaNeutral point of view Even when information is cited to reliable sources , you must present it with a neutral point of view NPOV. Articles should be based on thorough research of sources . All articles must adhere to NPOV, fairly representing all majority and significant-minority viewpoints published by reliable sources, in rough proportion to the prominence of each view. Tiny-minority views need not be included, except in articles devoted to them. If there is disagreement between sources, use in-text attribution  John Smith argues X, while Paul Jones maintains Y, followed by an inline citation . Sources themselves do not need to maintain a neutral point of view. Indeed, many reliable sources are not neutral. Our job as editors is simply to summarize what the reliable sources say. Notability Further information WikipediaNotability If no reliable independent sources can be found on a topic, Wikipedia should not have an article on it. Original research Further information WikipediaNo original research The No original research policy NOR is closely related to the Verifiability policy. Among its requirements are All material in Wikipedia articles must be attributable to a reliable published source. This means a reliable published source must exist for it, whether or not it is cited in the article. Sources must support the material clearly and directly drawing inferences from multiple sources to advance a novel position is prohibited by the NOR policy. 12  Base articles largely on reliable secondary sources . While primary sources are appropriate in some cases, relying on them can be problematic. For more information, see the Primary, secondary, and tertiary sources section of the NOR policy, and the Misuse of primary sources section of the BLP policy. See also Guidelines Reliable sources Identifying reliable sources medicine Information pages Wikipedia is not a reliable source Core content policies How to mine a source Identifying and using independent sources Identifying and using primary sources Video links When to cite Resources Improving referencing efforts Template messagesSources of articles WikiProject Reliability WikiProject Resource Exchange Essays Citation clutter Identifying and using tertiary sources Verifiability, not truth Notes  This principle was previously expressed on this policy page as the threshold for inclusion is verifiability, not truth . See the essay, WPVerifiability, not truth .  A source directly supports a given piece of material if the information is directly present in the source, so that using this source to support the material is not a violation of WikipediaNo original research . The location of any citation  including whether one is present in the article at all  is unrelated to whether a source directly supports the material. For questions about where and how to place citations, see WPCITE , WPCITELEAD , etc.  Once an editor has provided any source he or she believes, in good faith, to be sufficient, then any editor who later removes the material has an obligation to articulate specific problems that would justify its exclusion from Wikipedia e.g. why the source is unreliable the source does not support the claim undue emphasis  unencyclopedic content  etc.. If necessary, all editors are then expected to help achieve consensus , and any problems with the text or sourcing should be fixed before the material is added back.  It may be that the article contains so few citations it is impractical to add specific citation needed tags, in which case consider tagging a section with   unreferencedsection  , or the article with   refimprove   or   unreferenced  . In the case of a disputed category or on a disambiguation page, consider asking for a citation on the talk page.  When tagging or removing such material, please keep in mind such edits can easily be misunderstood. Some editors object to others making chronic, frequent, and large-scale deletions of unsourced information, especially if unaccompanied by other efforts to improve the material. Do not concentrate only on material of a particular POV, as that may result in accusations you are in violation of WPNPOV . Also check to see whether the material is sourced to a citation elsewhere on the page. For all these reasons, it is advisable to communicate clearly that you have a considered reason to believe the material in question cannot be verified.  Wales, Jimmy . Zero information is preferred to misleading or false information , WikiEN-l, May 16, 2006 I can NOT emphasize this enough. There seems to be a terrible bias among some editors that some sort of random speculative I heard it somewhere pseudo information is to be tagged with a needs a cite tag. Wrong. It should be removed, aggressively, unless it can be sourced. This is true of all information, but it is particularly true of negative inf ormation about living persons.  This includes material such as documents in publicly accessible archives as well as inscriptions in plain sight, e.g. tombstones.  a b Please do note that any exceptional claim would require exceptional sources .  a b Sources that may have interests other than professional considerations in the matter being reported are considered to be conflicted sources. Further examples of sources with conflicts of interest include but are not limited to articles by any media group that promotes the holding company of the media group or discredits its competitors news reports by journalists having financ ial interests in the companies being reported or in their competitors material including but not limited to news reports, books, articles and other publications involved in or struck down by litigation in any country, or released by parties involved in litigation against other involved parties, during, before or after the litigation and promotional material released through media in the form of paid news reports. For definitions of sources with conflict of interest The Columbia Center for New Media Teaching and Learning, Columbia University mentions A conflict of interest involves the abuse    actual, apparent, or potential    of the trust people have in professionals. The simplest working definition states A conflict of interest is a situation in which financial or other personal considerations have the potential to compromise or bias professional judgment and objectivity. An apparent conflict of interest is one in which a reasonable person would think the professionals judgment is likely to be compromised. A potential conflict of interest involves a situation that may develop into an actual conflict of interest. It is important to note that a conflict of interest exists whether or not decisions are affected by a personal interest a conflict of interest implies only the potential for bias, not likelihood. It is also important to note that a conflict of interest is no t considered misconduct in research, since the definition for misconduct is currently limited to fabrication, falsification, and plagiarism. The New York Times Company forwards this understanding Conflicts of interest, real or apparent, may come up in many areas. They may involve the relationships of staff members with readers, news sources, advocacy groups, advertisers, or competitors with one another, or with the newspaper or its parent company. And at a time when two-career families are the norm, the civic and professional activities o f spouses, family and companions can create conflicts or the appearance of conflicts.  Self-published material is characterized by the lack of independent reviewers those without a conflict of interest validating the reliability of content. Further examples of self-published sources include press releases, material contained within company websites, advertising campaigns, material published in media by the ownerspublishers of the media group, self-released music albums and electoral manifestos  The University of California, Berkeley library states Most pages found in general search engines for the web are self-published or published by businesses small and large with motives to get you to buy something or believe a point of view. Even within university and library web sites, there can be many pages that the institution does not try to oversee. Princeton University offers this understanding in its publication, Academic Integrity at Princeton 2011  Unlike most books and journal articles, which undergo strict editorial review before publication, much of the information on the Web is self-published. To be sure, there are many websites in which you can have confidence mainstream newspapers, refereed electronic journals, and university, library, and government collections of data. But for vast amounts of Web-based informa tion, no impartial reviewers have evaluated the accuracy or fairness of such material before its made instantly available across the globe. The Chicago Manual of Style, 16th Edition  dead link  states, any Internet site that does not have a specific publisher or sponsoring body should be treated as unpublished or self-published work.  Rekdal, Ole Bjrn 1 August 2014. Academic urban legends . Social Studies of Science . 44 4 638654. doi  10.11770306312714535679 . ISSN   0306-3127 . Retrieved 30 April 2016 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  a b When there is dispute about whether a piece of text is fully supported by a given source, direct quotes and other relevant details from the source should be provided to other editors as a courtesy. Do not violate the sources copyright when doing so.  Hume, David . An Enquiry concerning Human Understanding , Forgotten Books, 1984, pp. 82, 86 first published in 1748 as Philosophical enquiries concerning human Understanding , or the Oxford 1894 edition OL   7067396M at para. 91 A wise man   ... proportions his belief to the evidence   ... That no testimony is sufficient to establish a miracle, unless the testimony be of such a kind, that its falsehood would be more miraculous, than the fact, which it endeavours to establish and even in that case there is a mutual destruction of arguments, and the superior only gives us an assurance suitable to that degree of force, which remains, after deducting the inferior. In the 18th century, Pierre-Simon Laplace reformulated the idea as The weight of evidence for an extraordinary claim must be proportioned to its strangeness. Marcello Truzzi recast it again, in 1978, as An extraordinary claim requires extraordinary proof. Carl Sagan , finally, popularized the concept broadly as Extraordinary claims require extraordinary evidence in 1980 on Cosmos A Personal Voyage  this was the formulation originally used on Wikipedia. Further reading Wales, Jimmy. Insist on sources , WikiEN-l, July 19, 2006 I really want to encourage a much stronger culture which says it is better to have no information, than to have information like this, with no sources.referring to a rather unlikely statement about the founders of Google throwing pies at each other. v t e Wikipedia referencing Policies and guidelines Verifiability Biographies of living persons Reliable sources Medicine Citing sources Scientific citations General advice Citation needed Find sources Combining sources Offline sources Referencing styles Citing sources Citation Style 1 Citation Style 2 Citation Style Vancouver LSA Comics Citation templates Reflist template Inline citations Footnotes Parenthetical referencing Punctuation and footnotes Shortened footnotes Nesting footnotes Help for beginners Reference-tags Citations quick reference Introduction to referencing Referencing with citation templates Referencing without using templates Referencing dos and donts Citing Wikipedia Advanced help Cite link labels Citation tools Cite errors Cite messages Converting between references formats Reference display customization References and page numbers Template documentation   Edit refs     Refref     Refref2     Refstart   Tools Wikipedia Library v t e Wikipedia key policies and guidelines Five pillars What Wikipedia is not Ignore all rules Content Verifiability No original research Neutral point of view What Wikipedia is not Biographies of living persons Image use Article titles Notability Autobiography Citing sources Reliable sources medicine Do not include copies of lengthy primary sources Plagiarism Dont create hoaxes Fringe theories Patent nonsense External links Portal namespace Conduct Civility Consensus Editing policy Harassment Vandalism Ignore all rules No personal attacks Ownership of content Edit warring Dispute resolution Sock puppetry No legal threats Child protection Paid-contribution disclosure Assume good faith Conflict of interest Disruptive editing Do not disrupt Wikipedia to illustrate a point Etiquette Gaming the system Please do not bite the newcomers Courtesy vanishing Responding to threats of harm Deletion Deletion policy Proposed deletion Biographies Books Criteria for speedy deletion Attack page Oversight Revision deletion Enforcement Administrators Banning Blocking Page protection Editing Article size Be bold Disambiguation Hatnotes Talk page guidelines Signatures Broad-concept article Style Manual of Style Contents Accessibility Understandability Dates and numbers Images Layout Lead section Linking Lists Classification Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Template namespace Project content Project namespace WikiProjects User pages User boxes Shortcuts Subpages WMF List of policies Friendly space policy Licensing and copyright Privacy policy Values FAQ List of all policies and guidelines List of policies List of guidelines Lists of attempts in creating fundamental principles Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleWikipediaVerifiability oldid911881921  Categories  Wikipedia policies Wikipedia content policies Wikipedia verifiability Hidden categories Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Project pages with short description