Stakeholder corporate From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search For other uses, see Stakeholder disambiguation . In a corporation , a stakeholder is a member of groups without whose support the organization would cease to exist, 1  as defined in the first usage of the word in a 1963 internal memorandum at the Stanford Research Institute . The theory was later developed and championed by R. Edward Freeman in the 1980s. Since then it has gained wide acceptance in business practice and in theorizing relating to strategic management , corporate governance , business purpose and corporate social responsibility CSR. The definition of corporate responsibilities through a classification of stakeholders to consider has been criticised as creating a false dichotomy between the shareholder model and the stakeholders model 2  or a false analogy of the obligations towards shareholders and other interested parties. 3  Any action taken by any organization or any group might affect those people who are linked with them in the private sector. For examples these are parents, children, customers, owners, employees, associates, partners, contractors, and suppliers, people that are related or located nearby. Primary stakeholders are usually internal stakeholders, are those that engage in economic transactions with the business for example stockholders, customers, suppliers, creditors, and employees. Secondary stakeholders  are usually external stakeholders, are those who   although they do not engage in direct economic exchange with the business   are affected by or can affect its actions for example the general public, communities, activist groups, business support groups, and the media. Excluded stakeholders  are those such as children or the disinterested public, originally as they had no economic impact on business. Now as the concept takes an anthropocentric perspective, while some groups like the general public may be recognized as stakeholders others remain excluded. Such a perspective does not give plants, animals or even geology a voice as stakeholders, but only an instrumental value in relation to human groups or individuals. A narrow mapping of a companys stakeholders might identify the following stakeholders 4  Employees Communities Shareholders Creditors Investors Government Customers Owners Financiers Managers A broader mapping of a companys stakeholders may also include  citation needed  Suppliers Distributors Labor unions Government regulatory agencies Government legislative bodies Government tax-collecting agencies Industry trade groups Professional associations NGOs and other advocacy groups Prospective employees Prospective customers Local communities National communities Public at Large Global Community Competitors Schools Future generations Analysts and Media Research centers Contents 1 In corporate responsibility 2 In management 3 Stakeholder theory 4 Examples of a companys stakeholders 5 See also 6 Citations 7 References In corporate responsibility  edit  In the field of corporate governance and corporate responsibility , a debate 5  6  is ongoing about whether the firm or company should be managed primarily for stakeholders, stockholders  shareholders , customers , or others. 7  Proponents in favour of stakeholders may base their arguments on the following four key assertions Value can best be created by trying to maximize joint outcomes. For example, according to this thinking, programs that satisfy both employees needs and stockholders wants are doubly valuable because they address two legitimate sets of stakeholders at the same time. There is evidence that the combined effects of such a policy are not only additive but even multiplicative. For instance, by simultaneously addressing customer wishes in addition to employee and stockholder interests, both of the latter two groups also benefit from increased sales. Supporters also take issue with the preeminent role given to stockholders by many business thinkers, especially in the past. The argument is that debt holders, employees, and suppliers also make contributions and thus also take risks in creating a successful firm. These normative arguments would matter little if stockholders  shareholders  had complete control in guiding the firm. However, many believe that due to certain kinds of board of directors structures, top managers like CEOs are mostly in control of the firm. The greatest value of a company is its image and brand. By attempting to fulfill the needs and wants of many different people ranging from the local population and customers to their own employees and owners, companies can prevent damage to their image and brand, prevent losing large amounts of sales and disgruntled customers, and prevent costly legal expenses. While the stakeh older view has an increased cost, many firms have decided that the concept improves their image, increases sales, reduces the risks of liability for corporate negligence , and makes them less likely to be targeted by pressure groups, campaigning groups and NGOs. A corporate stakeholder can affect or be affected by the actions of a business as a whole. Whereas shareholders are often the party with the most direct and obvious interest at stake in business decisions, they are one of various subsets of stakeholders, as customers and employees also have stakes in the outcome. In the most developed sense of stakeholders in terms of real corporate responsibility , the bearers of externalities are included in stakeholdership. In management  edit  In the last decades of the 20th century, the word stakeholder became more commonly used to mean a person or organization that has a legitimate interest in a project or entity. In discussing the decision-making process for institutionsincluding large business corporations , government agencies , and non-profit organizations the concept has been broadened to include everyone with an interest or stake in what the entity does. This includes not only vendors, employees , and customers , but even members of a community where its offices or factory may affect the local economy or environment. In this context, a stakeholder includes not only the directors or trustees on its governing board who are stakeholders in the traditional sense of the word but also all persons who paid into the figurative stake and the persons to whom it may be paid out in the sen se of a payoff in game theory , meaning the outcome of the transaction. Therefore, in order to effectively engage with a community of stakeholders, the organisations management needs to be aware of the stakeholders, understand their wants and expectations, understand their attitude supportive, neutral or opposed, and be able to prioritize the members of the overall community to focus the organisations scarce resources on the most significant stakeholders. 8  Example For example, in the case of a professional landlord undertaking the refurbishment of some rented housing that is occupied while the work is being carried out, key stakeholders would be the residents, neighbors for whom the work is a nuisance, and the tenancy-management team and housing-maintenance team employed by the landlord. Other stakeholders would be funders and the desi gn-and-construction team. The holders of each separate kind of interest in the entitys affairs are called a constituency, so there may be a constituency of stockholders , a constituency of adjoining property owners, a constituency of banks the entity owes money to, and so on. In that usage, constituent is a synonym for stakeholder. 9  Stakeholder theory  edit  Main article Stakeholder theory Post, Preston, Sachs 2002, use the following definition of the term stakeholder A person, group or organization that has interest or concern in an organization. Stakeholders can affect or be affected by the organizations actions, objectives and policies. Some examples of key stakeholders are creditors, directors, employees, government and its agencies, owners sharehol ders, suppliers, unions, and the community from which the business draws its resources. Not all stakeholders are equal. A companys customers are entitled to fair trading practices but they are not entitled to the same consideration as the companys employees. The stakeholders in a corporation are the individuals and constituencies that contribute, either voluntarily or involu ntarily, to its wealth-creating capacity and activities, and that are therefore its potential beneficiaries andor risk bearers. 10  This definition differs from the older definition of the term stakeholder in Stakeholder theory Freeman, 1983 that also includes competitors as stakeholders of a corporation. Robert Allen Phillips provides a moral foundation for stakeholder theory in Stakeholder Theory and Organizational Ethics . There he defends a principle of stakeholder fairness based on the work of John Rawls , as well as a distinction between normatively and derivatively legitimate stakeholders. Real stakeholders, labelled stakeowners genuine stakeholders with a legitimate stake, the loyal partners who strive for mutual benefits. Stakeowners own and deserve a stake in the firm. Stakeholder reciprocity could be an innovative criterion in the corporate governance debate as to who sh ould be accorded representation on the board. Corporate social responsibility should imply a corporate stakeholder responsibility. Examples of a companys stakeholders  edit  Stakeholders Stakeholders concerns 11  Government taxation, VAT , legislation , employment, truthful reporting, legalities, externalities... Employees rates of pay, job security , compensation, respect, truthful communication, appreciation, acknowledgement, recognition. Customers value, quality, customer care, ethical products. Suppliers providers of products and services used in the end product for the customer, equitable business opportunities. Creditors credit score, new contracts, liquidity. Community jobs, involvement, environmental protection, shares, truthful communication. Trade unions quality, worker protection, jobs. Owners profitability, longevity, market share, market standing, succession planning, raising capital, growth, social goals. Investors return on investment, income. See also  edit  Look up stakeholder in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Stakeholder engagement Stakeholder law UK company law Strategy Markup Language , whose core elements include Stakeholder  Citations  edit   Freeman, R. Edward Reed, David L. 1983. Stockholders and Stakeholders A new perspective on Corporate Governance . California Management Review . 25 3 88106. doi  10.230741165018 . JSTOR   41165018 . Retrieved 21 October 2017 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Frmond, Olivier October 2000. The Role of Stakeholders PDF . OECD .  Heath, Joseph 2006. Business ethics without stakeholders. Business Ethics Quarterly . 16 3 533557. doi  10.5840beq200616448 . One of the central advantages of the market failures approach to business ethics is that, far from being antithetical to the spirit of capitalism, it can plausibly claim to be providing a more rigorous articulation of the central principles that structure the capitalist economy. If firms were to behave more ethically, according to this conception, the result would be an enhancement of the benefits that the market provides to society, and the elimination of many of its persistent weaknesses. It would help to perfect the private enterprise system, rather than destroy it.  Carroll, Archie B. JulyAugust 1991. The Pyramid of corporate social responsibilities PDF . Business Horizons . CS1 maint date format  link   Shareholder vs. Stakeholder Two Approaches to Corporate Governance . IESE Business School. June 2008 . Retrieved 2017-04-29 .  Shareholders v Stakeholders A new idolatry . The Economist . 2010-04-22 . Retrieved 2017-04-29 .  Lin, Tom C.W., Incorporating Social Activism December 1, 2018. 98 Boston University Law Review 1535  Stakeholder Relationship Management A Maturity Model for Organisational Implementation , Dr. Lynda Bourne, 2007  Shiller, R 2003. From Efficient Markets Theory to Behavioral Finance. Journal of Economic Perspectives . 17 1 83104. doi  10.1257089533003321164967 .  httpwww.sup.orgbookstitleid1967  Certo  Certo 2005. Modern Management 10th ed.. Pearson. CS1 maint uses authors parameter  link  References  edit  Freeman, R. Edward Moutchnik, Alexander 2013. Stakeholder management and CSR questions and answers. UmweltWirtschaftsForum . 21 1 59. doi  10.1007s00550-013-0266-3 . Freeman, R.E. and Reed, D.L., 1983. Stockholders and stakeholders A new perspective on corporate governance. California management review, 253, pp.88-106. Redefining the Corporation An International Colloquy Post, James 2002. Redefining the Corporation Stakeholder Management and Organizational Wealth . Stanford University Press . Retrieved 2009-01-29 . Cite journal requires journal  help  Figge, F. Schaltegger, S. What is Stakeholder Value Developing a Catchphrase into a Benchmarking Tool. LneburgGenevaParis University of LneburgPictet in association with United Nations Environment Program UNEP, 2000 CSM Lneburg 799 kBytes v t e Social and environmental accountability Ethics and principles Aarhus Convention Corporate accountability   behaviour   social responsibility Ethical banking Ethical code Extended producer responsibility Organizational ethics Organizational justice Principles for Responsible Investment Social responsibility Stakeholder theory Sullivan principles Transparency behavioral social UN Global Compact Social accounting Double bottom line Ethical positioning index Higg Index Impact assessment   environmental equality social  ISO 26000 ISO 45001 Genuine progress indicator Performance indicator SA8000 Social return on investment Whole-life cost Environmental accounting Carbon accounting Eco-Management and Audit Scheme Emission inventory Environmental full-cost accounting   impact assessment   management system   profit-and-loss account ISO 14000 ISO 14031 Life-cycle assessment Pollutant release and transfer register Sustainability accounting   measurement   metrics and indices   standards and certification   supply chain Toxics Release Inventory Triple bottom line Reporting Global Reporting Initiative GxP guidelines Sustainability reporting Auditing Community-based monitoring Environmental   certification  Fair trade   certification  ISO 19011 Related Bangladesh Accord Benefit corporation Child labour Community interest company Conflict of interest Disasters Disinvestment Eco-labeling Environmental pricing reform Environmental, social and corporate governance Ethical consumerism Euthenics Health impact assessment Market governance mechanism Product certification Public participation Social enterprise Socially responsible investing Stakeholder   engagement  Supply chain management Environment portal Category Commons Organizations Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleStakeholder_corporate oldid913303285  Categories  Corporate finance Public relations Hidden categories CS1 maint date format CS1 maint uses authors parameter All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2013 CS1 errors missing periodical