Comecon From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Not to be confused with Comic-Con . Council for Mutual Economic Assistance    Sovt Ekonomcheskoy Vzaimopmoshchi BGNPCGN Russian Sovet Ekonomieskoj Vzaimopomoi GOST Russian 19491991 Flag Logo Map of Comecon member states as of November 1986    Members    Formal members which did not participate    Associates who actually participated    Observers Status Economic union Headquarters Moscow Official languages 10 languages Russian Bulgarian Czech German Hungarian Mongolian Polish Romanian Spanish Vietnamese Member states See list Bulgaria Czechoslovakia   Cuba   East Germany withdrew in 1990 Hungary Mongolia Poland Romania   Soviet Union   Vietnam Historical era Cold War   Organization established 58 January 1949   Dissolution of Comecon 28 June 1991    Dissolution of the Soviet Union 26 December 1991 Area 1960 23,422,281  km 2 9,043,393  sq  mi 1989 25,400,231  km 2 9,807,084  sq  mi Population   1989 504 million Currency 10 currencies Soviet ruble East German mark Polish zloty Czechoslovak koruna Romanian leu Bulgarian lev Hungarian forint Cuban peso Mongolian tgrg Vietnamese dong Driving side right Succeeded by Commonwealth of Independent States Eurasian Economic Community Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development ASEAN ALBA Visegrd Group Eastern Bloc Soviet Socialist Republics Armenia Azerbaijan Byelorussia Estonia Georgia Kazakhstan Kirghizia Latvia Lithuania Moldavia Russia Tajikistan Turkmenia Ukraine Uzbekistan Allied states Afghanistan Albania Angola Benin Bulgaria China Congo Cuba Czechoslovakia East Germany Ethiopia Grenada Hungary Kampuchea Laos Mongolia Mozambique North Korea Poland Romania Somalia South Yemen Vietnam Yugoslavia Related organizations Cominform Comecon Warsaw Pact World Federation of Trade Unions World Federation of Democratic Youth Dissent and opposition Anti-Soviet partisans Albania Bulgaria Croatia Estonia Latvia Lithuania Poland Romania Serbia Ukraine Guerrilla war in the Baltic states Forest Brothers Operation Jungle Soviet occupation Protests and uprisings Plze 1953 East Germany 1953 Georgia 1956 Pozna 1956 Hungary 1956 Novocherkassk 1962 Czechoslovakia 1968 Invasion Red Square 1968 Charter 77 Czechoslovakia Solidarity Poland Jeltoqsan Kazakhstan Braov rebellion Romania January Events Lithuania The Barricades Latvia April 9 tragedy Georgia Black January Azerbaijan Cold War events Marshall Plan Czechoslovak coup TitoStalin split Berlin Blockade Korean War Secret Speech Sino-Soviet Split Berlin Wall Cuban Missile Crisis Vietnam War Cuban intervention in Angola Afghan War Moscow Olympics Gulf War Decline Singing Revolution Polish Round Table Agreement Revolutions of 1989 Fall of the Berlin Wall January Events in Latvia Breakup of Yugoslavia Yugoslav Wars End of the Soviet Union Fall of communism in Albania Dissolution of Czechoslovakia v t e The Council for Mutual Economic Assistance  Russian     , tr. Sovt Ekonomcheskoy Vzaimopmoshchi ,   English abbreviation COMECON , CMEA , CEMA , or CAME  was an economic organization from 1949 to 1991 under the leadership of the Soviet Union that comprised the countries of the Eastern Bloc along with a number of communist states elsewhere in the world. 1  The descriptive term was often applied to all multilateral activities involving members of the organization, rather than being restricted to the direct functions of Comecon and its organs. 2  This usage was sometimes extended as well to bilateral relations among members because in the system of Communist international economic relations, multilateral accords    typically of a general nature    tended to be implemented through a set of more detailed, bilateral agreements. 3  Moscow was concerned about the Marshall Plan . Comecon was meant to prevent countries in the Soviet sphere of influence from moving towards that of the Americans and South-East Asia. Comecon was the Eastern Blocs reply to the formation in Western Europe of the Marshall Plan. 3  Contents 1 Name in official languages of the members 2 History 2.1 Foundation 2.2 Khrushchev era 2.3 Brezhnev era 2.4 Perestroika 2.5 Post-Cold War activity after Comecon 3 Membership 3.1 Full members 3.2 Former members 3.3 Associate status 3.4 Observer status 4 Exchange 4.1 Oil transfers 4.2 Ineffective production 5 Structure 5.1 The Session 5.2 Executive Committee 5.3 Other entities 5.4 Affiliated agencies 6 Nature of operation 7 Comecon versus the European Economic Community 8 Prices, exchange rates, coordination of national plans 9 International relations within the Comecon 10 See also 11 Notes 12 References 13 External links Name in official languages of the members  edit  An East German stamp celebrating the 40th anniversary of Comecon in 1989 Country name Official language Name Abbreviation   Bulgaria Bulgarian     Svet za ikonomieska vzaimopomot  SIV   Cuba Spanish Consejo de Ayuda Mutua Econmica CAME   Czechoslovakia Czech Rada vzjemn hospodsk pomoci RVHP Slovak Rada vzjomnej hospodrskej pomoci RVHP   East Germany German Rat fr gegenseitige Wirtschaftshilfe RGW   Hungary Hungarian Klcsns Gazdasgi Segtsg Tancsa KGST   Mongolia Mongolian      Ediin zasgiin khariltsan tuslaltsakh zvll  EZKTZ   Poland Polish Rada Wzajemnej Pomocy Gospodarczej RWPG   Romania Romanian Consiliul de Ajutor Economic Reciproc CAER   Soviet Union Russian    Sovet ekonomicheskoy vzaimopomoshchi  SEV Ukrainian    Rada Ekonomichnoyi Vzayemodopomohy  REV Belarusian    Saviet Ekanaminaj Uzajemadapamohi  SEU Uzbek     Ozaro iqtisodiy yordam kengashi  OIYK Kazakh     Ekonomkalyq zara kmek keesi  EOKK Georgian     Ormkhrivi Ekonomikuri Dakhmarebis Sabcho  OEDS Azerbaijani     Qarlql qtisadi Yardm uras  QY Lithuanian Ekonomins Savitarpio Pagalbos Taryba ESPT Moldavian      Consiliul de Ajutor Economic Reciproc  CAER Latvian Savstarpjs ekonomisks paldzbas padome SEPP Kirghiz       z ara ekonomikalk jardam n kee  AEJK Tajik      Shroi baroi kumak iqtisodii mushtarak K ShBKIM Armenian     Khorhurdy pvokhadardz tntesakan ajaktsutyan  KhPTA Turkmen     Ykdysady zara kmek grri  YKG Estonian Vastastikkuse Majandusabi Nukogu VMN   Vietnam Vietnamese Hi ng Tng tr Kinh t HTTKT History  edit  Main article History of the Comecon Former Comecon headquarters in Moscow. Foundation  edit  The Comecon was founded in 1949 by the Soviet Union , Bulgaria , Czechoslovakia , Hungary , Poland , and Romania . The primary factors in Comecons formation appear to have been Joseph Stalin s desire to cooperate and strengthen the international relationships at an economic level with the lesser states of Central Europe, 3  and which were now, increasingly, cut off from their traditional markets and suppliers in the rest of Europe. 4  Czechoslovakia, Hungary, and Poland had remained interested in Marshall aid despite the requirements for a convertible currency and market economies . These requirements, which would inevitably have resulted in stronger economic ties to free European markets than to the Soviet Union, were absolutely unacceptable to Stalin, who in July 1947, ordered these communist-dominated governments to pull out of the Paris Conference on the European Recovery Programme. This has been described as the moment of truth in the post- World War II division of Europe. 5  According to the Soviet view the Anglo-American bloc and American monopolists ... whose interests had nothing in common with those of the European people had spurned East-West collaboration within the framework agreed within the United Nations, that is, through the Economic Commission for Europe. 6  However, as always, Stalins precise motives are inscrutable 7  They may well have been more negative than positive, with Stalin more anxious to keep other powers out of neighbouring buffer states  than to integrate them. 8  Furthermore, GATT s notion of ostensibly nondiscriminatory treatment of trade partners was thought to be incompatible with notions of socialist solidarity. 4  In any event, proposals for a customs union and economic integration of Central and Eastern Europe date back at least to the Revolutions of 1848 although many earlier proposals had been intended to stave off the Russian andor communist menace 4  and the state-to-state trading inherent in centrally planned economies required some sort of coordination otherwise, a monopolist seller would face a monopsonist buyer, with no structure to set prices. 9  Comecon was established at a Moscow economic conference January 58, 1949, at which the six founding member countries were represented its foundation was publicly announced on January 25 Albania joined a month later and East Germany in 1950. 7  Recent research by the Romanian researcher Elena Dragomir suggests that Romania played a rather important role in the Comecons creation in 1949. Dragomir argues that Romania was interested in the creation of a system of cooperation to improve its trade relations with the other peoples democracies, especially with those able to export industrial equipment and machinery to Romania. 10  According to Dragomir, in December 1948, the Romanian leader Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej sent a letter to Stalin, proposing the creation of the Comecon. 11  This article may be confusing or unclear to readers . Please help us clarify the article . There might be a discussion about this on the talk page .  December 2016   Learn how and when to remove this template message  At first, planning seemed to be moving along rapidly. After pushing aside Nikolai Voznesensky s technocratic , price-based approach see further discussion below , the direction appeared to be toward a coordination of national economic plans, but with no coercive authority from Comecon itself. All decisions would require unanimous ratification, and even then governments would separately translate these into policy.  clarification needed  12  Then in summer 1950, probably unhappy with the favorable implications for the effective individual and collective sovereignty of the smaller states, Stalin seems to have taken Comecons personnel by surprise,  clarification needed  bringing operations to a nearly complete halt, as the Soviet Union moved domestically toward autarky and internationally toward an embassy system of meddling in other countries affairs directly rather than by constitutional means  clarification needed  . Comecons scope was officially limited in November 1950 to practical questions of facilitating trade.  clarification needed  13  One important legacy of this brief period of activity was the Sofia principle , adopted at the August 1949 Comecon council session in Bulgaria. This radically weakened intellectual property rights, making each countrys technologies available to the others for a nominal charge that did little more than cover the cost of documentation. This, naturally, benefited the less industrialized Comecon countries, and especially the technologically lagging Soviet Union, at the expense of East Germany and Czechoslovakia and, to a lesser extent, Hungary and Poland. This principle would weaken after 1968, as it became clear that it discouraged new researchand as the Soviet Union itself began to have more marketable technologies. 14  Khrushchev era  edit  After Stalins death in 1953, Comecon again began to find its footing. In the early 1950s, all Comecon countries had adopted relatively autarkic policies now they began again to discuss developing complementary specialties, and in 1956, ten permanent standing committees arose, intended to facilitate coordination in these matters. The Soviet Union began to trade oil for Comecon manufactured goods. There was much discussion of coordinating five-year plans . 14  However, once again, trouble arose. The Polish protests and Hungarian uprising led to major social and economic changes, including the 1957 abandonment of the 195660 Soviet five-year plan , as the Comecon governments struggled to reestablish their legitimacy and popular support. 15  The next few years saw a series of small steps toward increased trade and economic integration, including the introduction of the  convertible rouble    ru  , revised efforts at national specialization, and a 1959 charter modeled after the 1957 Treaty of Rome . 16  Once again, however, efforts at transnational central planning failed. In December 1961, a council session approved the Basic Principles of the International Socialist Division of Labour, which talked of closer coordination of plans and of concentrating production of similar products in one or several socialist countries. In November 1962, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev followed this up with a call for a common single planning organ. 17  This was resisted by Czechoslovakia, Hungary, and Poland, but most emphatically by increasingly nationalistic Romania, which strongly rejected the notion that they should specialize in agriculture. 18  In Central and Eastern Europe, only Bulgaria happily took on an assigned role also agricultural, but in Bulgarias case this had been the countrys chosen direction even as an independent country in the 1930s. 19  Essentially, by the time the Soviet Union was calling for tight economic integration, they no longer had the power to impose it. Despite some slow headwayintegration increased in petroleum, electricity, and other technicalscientific sectorsand the 1963 founding of an International Bank for Economic Co-operation, Comecon countries all increased trade with the West relatively more than with one another. 20  Brezhnev era  edit  From its founding until 1967, Comecon had operated only on the basis of unanimous agreements. It had become increasingly obvious that the result was usually failure. In 1967, Comecon adopted the interested party principle, under which any country could opt out of any project they chose, still allowing the other member states to use Comecon mechanisms to coordinate their activities. In principle, a country could still veto, but the hope was that they would typically choose just to step aside rather than either veto or be a reluctant participant. 21  This aimed, at least in part, at allowing Romania to chart its own economic course without leaving Comecon entirely or bringing it to an impasse. 22  Also until the late 1960s, the official term for Comecon activities was cooperation . The term integration was always avoided because of its connotations of monopolistic capitalist collusion. However, after the special council session of April 1969 and the development and adoption in 1971 of the Comprehensive Program for the Further Extension and Improvement of Cooperation and the Further Development of Socialist Economic Integration by Comecon Member Countries, Comecon activities were officially termed integration equalization of differences in relative scarcities of goods and services between states through the deliberate elimination of barriers to trade and other forms of interaction. Although such equalization had not been a pivotal point in the formation and implementation of Comecons economic policies, improved economic integration had always been Comecons goal. 3  23  While such integration was to remain a goal, and while Bulgaria became yet more tightly integrated with the Soviet Union, progress in this direction was otherwise continually frustrated by the national central planning prevalent in all Comecon countries, by the increasing diversity of its members which by this time included Mongolia and would soon include Cuba and by the overwhelming asymmetry and resulting distrust between the many small member states and the Soviet superstate which, in 1983, accounted for 88 percent of Comecons territory and 60 percent of its population. 24  In this period, there were some efforts to move away from central planning, by establishing intermediate industrial associations and combines in various countries which were often empowered to negotiate their own international deals. However, these groupings typically proved unwieldy, conservative, risk-averse, and bureaucratic, reproducing the problems they had been intended to solve. 25  One economic success of the 1970s was the development of Soviet oil fields. While doubtless Central and East Europeans resented having to defray some of the costs of developing the economy of their hated overlord and oppressor, 26  they benefited from low prices for fuel and other mineral products. As a result, Comecon economies generally showed strong growth in the mid-1970s. They were largely unaffected by the 1973 oil crisis . 25  Another short-term economic gain in this period was that dtente brought opportunities for investment and technology transfers from the West . This also led to an importation of Western cultural attitudes, especially in Central Europe. However, many undertakings based on Western technology were less than successful for example, Polands Ursus tractor factory did not do well with technology licensed from Massey Ferguson  other investment was wasted on luxuries for the party elite, and most Comecon countries ended up indebted to the West when capital flows died out as dtente faded in the late 1970s, and from 1979 to 1983, all of Comecon experienced a recession from which with the possible exceptions of East Germany and Bulgaria they never recovered in the Communist era. Romania and Poland experienced major declines in the standard of living. 27  Perestroika  edit  The 1985 Comprehensive Program for Scientific and Technical Progress and the rise to power of Soviet general secretary Mikhail Gorbachev increased Soviet influence in Comecon operations and led to attempts to give Comecon some degree of supranational authority. The Comprehensive Program for Scientific and Technical Progress was designed to improve economic cooperation through the development of a more efficient and interconnected scientific and technical base. 3  This was the era of perestroika restructuring, the last attempt to put the Comecon economies on a sound economic footing. 28  Gorbachev and his economic mentor Abel Aganbegyan hoped to make revolutionary changes in the economy, foreseeing that science will increasingly become a direct productive force, as Marx foresaw By the year 2000 the renewal of plant and machinery will be running at 6 percent or more per year. 29  The program was not a success. The Gorbachev regime made too many commitments on too many fronts, thereby overstretching and overheating the Soviet economy. Bottlenecks and shortages were not relieved but exacerbated, while the Central and East European members of Comecon resented being asked to contribute scarce capital to projects that were chiefly of interest to the Soviet Union 30  Furthermore, the liberalization that by June 25, 1988 allowed Comecon countries to negotiate trade treaties directly with the European Community the renamed EEC, and the  Sinatra doctrine  under which the Soviet Union allowed that change would be the exclusive affair of each individual country marked the beginning of the end for Comecon. Although the Revolutions of 1989 did not formally end Comecon, and the Soviet government itself lasted until 1991, the March 1990 meeting in Prague was little more than a formality, discussing the coordination of non-existent five-year plans. From January 1, 1991, the countries shifted their dealings with one another to a hard currency market basis. The result was a radical decrease in trade with one another, as Central and Eastern Europe exchanged asymmetrical trade dependence on the Soviet Union for an equally asymmetrical commercial dependence on the European Community. 31  The final Comecon council session took place on June 28, 1991, in Budapest , and led to an agreement to disband within 90 days. 32  The Soviet Union itself was dismantled on December 26, 1991. Post-Cold War activity after Comecon  edit  After the fall of the Soviet Union and communist rule in Eastern Europe, East Germany now unified with Germany automatically joined the European Union then the European Community in 1990. The Baltic States  Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania , Czech Republic , Hungary , Poland , Slovakia , and Slovenia joined the EU in 2004, followed by Bulgaria and Romania in 2007 and Croatia in 2013. To date, Czech Republic, Estonia, Germany former GDR, Hungary, Latvia, Poland, Slovakia, and Slovenia are now members of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development . All four Central European states are now members of the Visegrad Group . The Russian Federation , the successor to the Soviet Union along with Ukraine and Belarus founded the Commonwealth of Independent States which consists of the ex-Soviet republics. The country also leads the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation with Kazakhstan , Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan and the Eurasian Economic Union with Armenia , Belarus, Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan. Along with Ukraine, Georgia , Azerbaijan and Moldova are also part of the GUAM . Vietnam and Laos joined the Association of Southeast Asian Nations in 1995 and 1997 respectively. Membership  edit  Full members  edit  Name Official name Accession date Continent Capital Area km Population 1989 Density per km Currency Official languages   Bulgaria Peoples Republic of Bulgaria    Jan. 1949 Europe Sofia 110,994 9,009,018 81.2 Lev Bulgarian   Cuba Republic of Cuba  Repblica de Cuba  July 1972 North America Havana 109,884 10,486,110 95.4 Peso Spanish   Czechoslovakia Czechoslovak Socialist Republic  eskoslovensk socialistick republika  Jan. 1949 Europe Prague 127,900 15,658,079 122.4 Koruna Czech Slovak   East Germany German Democratic Republic  Deutsche Demokratische Republik  1950 Europe East Berlin 108,333 16,586,490 153.1 Mark German   Hungary Hungarian Peoples Republic  Magyar Npkztrsasg  Jan. 1949 Europe Budapest 93,030 10,375,323 111.5 Forint Hungarian   Mongolia Mongolian Peoples Republic      1962 Asia Ulaanbaatar 1,564,116 2,125,463 1.4 Tgrg Mongolian   Poland Polish Peoples Republic  Polska Rzeczpospolita Ludowa  Jan. 1949 Europe Warsaw 312,685 38,094,812 121.8 Zloty Polish   Romania Socialist Republic of Romania  Republica Socialist Romnia  Jan. 1949 Europe Bucharest 238,391 23,472,562 98.5 Leu Romanian   Soviet Union Union of Soviet Socialist Republics     Jan. 1949 Europe  Asia Moscow 22,402,200 286,730,819 12.8 Ruble Russian   Vietnam 3  Socialist Republic of Vietnam  Cng ha x hi ch ngha Vit Nam  1978 Asia Hanoi 332,698 66,757,401 200.7 ng Vietnamese Former members  edit  Name Official name Accession date Withdrawn Continent Capital Currency Official languages Notes   Albania Peoples Socialist Republic of Albania  Republika Popullore Socialiste e Shqipris  Feb. 1949 1987 Europe Tirana Lek Albanian Albania had stopped participating in Comecon activities in 1961 following the Soviet-Albanian split , but formally withdrew in 1987. Associate status  edit  1964  Yugoslavia Observer status  edit  1950    China stopped participating in Comecon activities in 1961 following the Sino-Soviet split  1956    North Korea 1973    Finland 1975  Iraq 33    Mexico 1976  Angola 1984    Nicaragua 1985  Mozambique 1986  Afghanistan Ethiopia Laos   South Yemen In the late 1950s, a number of communist-ruled non-member countries    the Peoples Republic of China , North Korea , Mongolia , Vietnam , and Yugoslavia    were invited to participate as observers in Comecon sessions. Although Mongolia and Vietnam later gained full membership, China stopped attending Comecon sessions after 1961. Yugoslavia negotiated a form of associate status in the organization, specified in its 1964 agreement with Comecon. 3  Collectively, the members of the Comecon did not display the necessary prerequisites for economic integration their level of industrialization was low and uneven, with a single dominant member the Soviet Union producing 70 of the community national product. 34  In the late 1980s, there were ten full members the Soviet Union, six East European countries, and three extra-regional members. Geography, therefore, no longer united Comecon members. Wide variations in economic size and level of economic development also tended to generate divergent interests among the member countries. All these factors combined to give rise to significant differences in the member states expectations about the benefits to be derived from membership in Comecon. Unity was provided instead by political and ideological factors. All Comecon members were united by a commonality of fundamental class interests and the ideology of Marxism-Leninism and had common approaches to economic ownership state versus private and management plan versus market. I n 1949 the ruling communist parties of the founding states were also linked internationally through the Cominform , from which Yugoslavia had been expelled the previous year. Although the Cominform was disbanded in 1956, interparty links continued to be strong among Comecon members, and all participated in periodic international conferences of communist parties. Comecon provided a mechanism through which its leading member, the Soviet Union, sought to foster economic links with and among its closest political and military allies. The East European members of Comecon were also militarily allied with the Soviet Union in the Warsaw Pact . 3  There were three kinds of relationships  besides the 10 full memberships  with the Comecon Yugoslavia was the only country considered to have associate member status. On the basis of the 1964 agreement, Yugoslavia participated in twenty-one of the thirty-two key Comecon institutions as if it were a full member. 3  Finland , Iraq , Mexico , and Nicaragua had a cooperant status with Comecon. Because the governments of these countries were not empowered to conclude agreements in the name of private companies, the governments did not take part in Comecon operations. They were represented in Comecon by commissions made up of members of the government and the business community. The commissions were empowered to sign various framework agreements with Comecons Joint Commission on Cooperation. 3  After 1956, Comecon allowed certain countries with communist or pro-Soviet governments to attend sessions as observers. In November 1986, delegations from Afghanistan , Ethiopia , Laos , and South Yemen attended the 42nd Council Session as observers. 3  Exchange  edit  Working with neither meaningful exchange rates nor a market economy, Comecon countries had to look to world markets as a reference point for prices, but unlike agents acting in a market, prices tended to be stable over a period of years, rather than constantly fluctuating, which assisted central planning. Also, there was a tendency to underprice raw materials relative to the manufactured goods produced in many of the Comecon countries. 35  International barter helped preserve the Comecon countries scarce hard currency reserves. In strict economic terms, barter inevitably harmed countries whose goods would have brought higher prices in the free market or whose imports could have been obtained more cheaply and benefitted those for whom it was the other way around. Still, all of the Comecon countries gained some stability, and the governments gained some legitimacy, 35  and in many ways this stability and protection from the world market was viewed, at least in the early years of Comecon, as an advantage of the system, as was the formation of stronger ties with other communist countries. 36  Within Comecon, there were occasional struggles over just how this system should work. Early on, Nikolai Voznesensky pushed for a more law-governed and technocratic price-based approach. However, with the August 1948 death of Andrei Zhdanov , Voznesensky lost his patron and was soon accused of treason as part of the Leningrad Affair  within two years he was dead in prison. Instead, what won out was a physical planning approach that strengthened the role of central governments over technocrats. 37  At the same time, the effort to create a single regime of planning common economic organization with the ability to set plans throughout the Comecon region also came to nought. A protocol to create such a system was signed January 18, 1949, but never ratified. 38  While historians are not unanimous on why this was stymied, it clearly threatened the sovereignty not only of the smaller states but even of the Soviet Union itself, since an international body would have had real power Stalin clearly preferred informal means of intervention in the other Comecon states. 39  This lack of either rationality or international central planning tended to promote autarky in each Comecon country because none fully trusted the others to deliver goods and services. 37  With few exceptions, foreign trade in the Comecon countries was a state monopoly , and the state agencies and captive trading companies were often corrupt. Even at best, this tended to put several removes between a producer and any foreign customer, limiting the ability to learn to adjust to foreign customers needs. Furthermore, there was often strong political pressure to keep the best products for domestic use in each country. From the early 1950s to Comecons demise in the early 1990s, intra-Comecon trade, except for Soviet petroleum, was in steady decline. 40  Oil transfers  edit  Beginning no later than the early 1970s, 41  Soviet petroleum and natural gas were routinely transferred within Comecon at below-market rates. Most Western commentators have viewed this as implicit, politically motivated subsidization of shaky economies to defuse discontents and reward compliance with Soviet wishes. 42  However, other commentators say that this may not have been deliberate policy, noting that whenever prices differ from world market prices, there will be winners and losers. They argue that this may have been simply an unforeseen consequence of two factors the slow adjustment of Comecon prices during a time of rising oil and gas prices, and the fact that mineral resources were abundant in the Comecon sphere, relative to manufactured goods. A possible point of comparison is that there were also winners and losers under EEC agricultural policy in the same period. 43  Russian and Kazakh oil kept the Comecon countries oil prices low when the 1973 oil crisis ran about and quadrupled American oil prices. Ineffective production  edit  The organization of Comecon was officially focused on common expansion of states, more effective production and building relationships between countries within. And as in every planned economy, operations did not reflect state of market, innovations, availability of items or the specific needs of a country. One example came from former Czechoslovakia. In the 1970s, the Communist party of Czechoslovakia finally realized that there was a need for underground trains. Czechoslovak designers projected a cheap but technologically innovative underground train. The train was a state-of-the-art project, capable of moving underground or on the surface using standard rails, had a high number of passenger seats, and was lightweight. According to the designers, the train was technol ogically more advanced than the trains used in New Yorks Subway, Londons Tube or the Paris Metro. However, due to the plan of Comecon, older Soviet trains were used, which guaranteed profit for the Soviet Union and work for workers in Soviet factories. That economical change lead to the cancellation of the R1 trains by A. Honzk. The Comecon plan, though more profitable for the Soviets, if less resourceful for the Czechs and Slovaks, forced the Czechoslovak government to buy trains Es 81-709 and 81-71, both of which were designed in early 1950s and were heavy, unreliable and expensive. Materials available only in Czech Republic and Slovakia, video included 44  On the other hand, Czechoslovak trams  Tatra T3  and jet trainers  L-29  were the standard for all Comecon countries, including the USSR, and other countries could develop their own designs but only for their own needs, like Poland respectively, Konstal trams and TS-11 jets. Poland was a manufacturer of light helicopters for Comecon countries  Mi-2 of the Soviet design. The USSR developed their own model Kamov Ka-26 and Romania produced French helicopters under license for their own market. In a formal or informal way, often the countries were discouraged from developing their own designs that competed with the main Comecon design. Structure  edit  Although not formally part of the organizations hierarchy, the Conference of First Secretaries of Communist and Workers Parties and of the Heads of Government of the Comecon Member Countries was Comecons most important organ. These party and government leaders gathered for conference meetings regularly to discuss topics of mutual interest. Because of the rank of conference participants, their decisions had considerable influence on the actions taken by Comecon and its organs. 3  The official hierarchy of Comecon consisted of the Session of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance, the Executive Committee of the Council, the Secretariat of the Council, four council committees, twenty-four standing commissions, six interstate conferences, two scientific institutes, and several associated organizations. 3  The Session  edit  The Session of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance, officially the highest Comecon organ, examined fundamental problems of economic integration and directed the activities of the Secretariat and other subordinate organizations. Delegations from each Comecon member country attended these meetings. Prime ministers usually headed the delegations, which met during the second quarter of each year in a member countrys capital the location of the meeting was determined by a system of rotation based on Cyrillic script . All interested parties had to consider recommendations handed down by the Session. A treaty or other kind of legal agreement implemented adopted recommendations. Comecon itself might adopt decisions only on organizational and procedural matters pertaining to itself and its organs. 3  Each country appointed one permanent representative to maintain relations between members and Comecon between annual meetings. An extraordinary Session, such as the one in December 1985, might be held with the consent of at least one-third of the members. Such meetings usually took place in Moscow. 3  Executive Committee  edit  The highest executive organ in Comecon, the Executive Committee, was entrusted with elaborating policy recommendations and supervising their implementation between sessions. In addition, it supervised work on plan coordination and scientific-technical cooperation. Composed of one representative from each member country, usually a deputy chairman of the Council of Ministers, the Executive Committee met quarterly, usually in Moscow. In 1971 and 1974, the Executive Committee acquired economic departments that ranked above the standing commissions. These economic departments considerably strengthened the authority and importance of the Executive Committee. 3  Other entities  edit  There were four council committees Council Committee for Cooperation in Planning, Council Committee for Scientific and Technical Cooperation, Council Committee for Cooperation in Material and Technical Supply, and Council Committee for Cooperation in Machine Building. Their mission was to ensure the comprehensive examination and a multilateral settlement of the major problems of cooperation among member countries in the economy, science, and technology. All committees were headquartered in Moscow and usually met there. These committees advised the standing commissions, the Secretariat, the interstate conferences, and the scientific institutes in their areas of specialization. Their jurisdiction was generally wider than that of the standing commissions because they ha d the right to make policy recommendations to other Comecon organizations. 3  The Council Committee for Cooperation in Planning was the most important of the four. It coordinated the national economic plans of Comecon members. As such, it ranked in importance only after the Session and the Executive Committee. Made up of the chairmen of Comecon members national central planning offices, the Council Committee for Cooperation in Planning drew up draft agreements for joint projects, adopted a resolution approving these projects, and recommended approval to the concerned parties. If its decisions were not subject to approval by national governments and parties, this committee would be considered Comecons supranational planning body. 3  The international Secretariat, Comecons only permanent body, was Comecons primary economic research and administrative organ. The secretary, who has been a Soviet official since Comecon creation, was the official Comecon representative to Comecon member states and to other states and international organizations. Subordinate to the secretary were his deputy and the various departments of the Secretariat, which generally corresponded to the standing commissions. The Secretariats responsibilities included preparation and organization of Comecon sessions and other meetings conducted under the auspices of Comecon compilation of digests on Comecon activities conduct of economic and other research for Comecon members and preparation of recommendations on various issues c oncerning Comecon operations. 3  In 1956, eight standing commissions were set up to help Comecon make recommendations pertaining to specific economic sectors. The commissions have been rearranged and renamed a number of times since the establishment of the first eight. In 1986 there were twenty-four standing commissions, each headquartered in the capital of a member country and headed by one of that countrys leading authorities in the field addressed by the commission. The Secretariat supervised the actual operations of the commissions. The standing commissions had authority only to make recommendations, which had then to be approved by the Executive Committee, presented to the Session, and ratified by the interested member countries. Commissions usually met twice a year in Moscow. 3  The six interstate conferences on water management, internal trade, legal matters, inventions and patents , pricing, and labor affairs served as forums for discussing shared issues and experiences. They were purely consultative and generally acted in an advisory capacity to the Executive Committee or its specialized committees. 3  The scientific institutes on standardization and on economic problems of the world economic system concerned themselves with theoretical problems of international cooperation. Both were headquartered in Moscow and were staffed by experts from various member countries. 3  Affiliated agencies  edit  1974 Medallion 10th Anniversary of Intermetall, that was founded in 1964 in Budapest Several affiliated agencies, having a variety of relationships with Comecon, existed outside the official Comecon hierarchy. They served to develop direct links between appropriate bodies and organizations of Comecon member countries. 3  These affiliated agencies were divided into two categories intergovernmental economic organizations which worked on a higher level in the member countries and generally dealt with a wider range of managerial and coordinative activities and international economic organizations which worked closer to the operational level of research, production, or trade. A few examples of the former are the International Bank for Economic Cooperation managed the transferable ruble system, the International Investment Bank in charge of financing joint projects, and Intermetall encouraged cooperation in ferrous metallurgy . 3  International economic organizations generally took the form of either joint enterprises, international economic associations or unions, or international economic partnerships. The latter included Interatominstrument nuclear machinery producers, Intertekstilmash textile machinery producers, and Haldex a Hungarian-Polish joint enterprise for reprocessing coal slag. 3  Nature of operation  edit  Comecon was an interstate organization through which members attempted to coordinate economic activities of mutual interest and to develop multilateral economic, scientific, and technical cooperation 3  The Charter 1959 stated that the sovereign equality of all members was fundamental to the organization and procedures of Comecon. 3  16  The Comprehensive Program further emphasized that the processes of integration of members economies were completely voluntary and do not involve the creation of supranational bodies. Hence under the provisions of the Charter, each country had the right to equal representation and one vote in all organs of Comecon, regardless of the countrys economic size or the size of its contribution to Comecons budget. 3  From 1967, the interestedness provisions of the Charter reinforced the principle of sovereign equality. Comecons recommendations and decisions could be adopted only upon agreement among the interested members, and each had the right to declare its interest in any matter under consideration. 3  21  Furthermore, in the words of the Charter as revised in 1967, recommendations and decisions shall not apply to countries that have declared that they have no interest in a particular matter. 3  21  Although Comecon recognized the principle of unanimity, from 1967 disinterested parties did not have a veto but rather the right to abstain from participation. A declaration of disinterest could not block a project unless the disinterested partys participation was vital. Otherwise, the Charter implied that the interested parties could proceed without the abstaining member, affirming that a country that had declared a lack of interest may subsequently adhere to the recommendations and decisions adopted by the remaining members of the Council. 3  However, a member country could also declare an interest and exercise a veto. 21  Over the years of its functioning, Comecon acted more as an instrument of mutual economic assistance than a means of economic integration, with multilateralism as an unachievable goal. 45  J.F. Brown, a British historian of Eastern Europe, cited Vladimir Sobell, a Czech-born economist, for the view that Comecon was an international protection system rather than an international trade system, in contrast with the EEC, which was essentially the latter. 46  Whereas the latter was interested in production efficiency and in allocation via market prices, the former was interested in bilateral aid to fulfill central planning goals. 46  Writing in 1988, Brown stated that many people in both the West and the East had assumed that a trade and efficiency approach was what Comecon was meant to pursue, which might make it an international trade system more like the EEC, and that some economists in Hungary and Poland had advocated such an approach in the 1970s and 1980s, but that it would need a transformation of every Eastern Bloc economy along Hungarian lines i.e., only partly centrally planned to enable a market-guided Comecon to work. And any change along those lines has been ideologically unacceptable up to now. 46  Comecon versus the European Economic Community  edit  European trade blocs as of the late 1980s. EEC member states are marked in blue, EFTA  green, and Comecon  red. Although Comecon was loosely referred to as the  European Economic Community EEC of Central and Eastern Europe, important contrasts existed between the two organizations. Both organizations administered economic integration however, their economic structure, size, balance, and influence differed 3  In the 1980s, the EEC incorporated the 270 million people in Europe into economic association through intergovernmental agreements aimed at maximizing profits and economic efficiency on a national and international scale. The EEC was a supranational body that could adopt decisions such as removing tariffs and enforce them. Activity by members was based on initiative and enterprise from below on the individual or enterprise level and was strongly influenced by market forces. 3  Comecon joined together 450 million people in 10 countries and on 3 continents. The level of industrialization from country to country differed greatly the organization linked two underdeveloped countries  Mongolia, and Vietnam  with some highly industrialized states. Likewise, a large national income difference existed between European and non-European members. The physical size, military power, and political and economic resource base of the Soviet Union made it the dominant member. In trade among Comecon members, the Soviet Union usually provided raw materials, and Central and East European countries provided finished equipment and machinery. The three underdeveloped Comecon members had a special relationship with the other seven. Comecon realized disproportionately more political than economic gains from its heavy contributions to these three countries underdeveloped economies. Economic integration or plan coordination formed the basis of Comecons activities. In this system, which mir rored the member countries planned economies, the decisions handed down from above ignored the influences of market forces or private initiative. Comecon had no supranational authority to make decisions or to implement them. Its recommendations could only be adopted with the full concurrence of interested parties and from 1967 21   did not affect those members who declared themselves disinterested parties. 3  As remarked above, most Comecon foreign trade was a state monopoly, placing several barriers between a producer and a foreign customer. 40  Unlike the EEC, where treaties mostly limited government activity and allowed the market to integrate economies across national lines, Comecon needed to develop agreements that called for positive government action. Furthermore, while private trade slowly limited or erased national rivalries in the EEC, state-to-state trade in Comecon reinforced national rivalries and resentments. 47  Prices, exchange rates, coordination of national plans  edit  See Comprehensive Program for Socialist Economic Integration International relations within the Comecon  edit  See International relations within the Comecon Soviet domination of Comecon was a function of its economic, political, and military power. The Soviet Union possessed 90 percent of Comecon members land and energy resources, 70 percent of their population, 65 percent of their national income, and industrial and military capacities second in the world only to those of the United States .  citation needed  The location of many Comecon committee headquarters in Moscow and the large number of Soviet nationals in positions of authority also testified to the power of the Soviet Union within the organization. 3  Soviet efforts to exercise political power over its Comecon partners, however, were met with determined opposition. The sovereign equality of members, as described in the Comecon Charter, assured members that if they did not wish to participate in a Comecon project, they might abstain. Central and East European members frequently invoked this principle in fear that economic interdependence would further reduce political sovereignty. Thus, neither Comecon nor the Soviet Union as a major force within Comecon had supranational authority. Although this fact ensured some degree of freedom from Soviet economic domination of the other members, it also deprived Comecon of necessary power to achieve maximum economic efficiency. 3  See also  edit  Soviet Union portal Economy portal Association of Southeast Asian Nations Bilateral trade Commonwealth of Independent States Economy of the Soviet Union Eurasian Economic Union European Union History of the Soviet Union Non-Aligned Movement Planned economy Shanghai Cooperation Organisation Spartakiad ALBA Visegrad Group Warsaw Pact Notes  edit   Michael C. Kaser, Comecon Integration problems of the planned economies Oxford University Press, 1967.  For example, this is the usage in the Library of Congress Country Study that is heavily cited in the present article.  a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa ab ac ad ae af ag ah ai aj Germany East, Library of Congress Country Study, Appendix B The Council for Mutual Economic Assistance Archived 2009-05-01 at the Wayback Machine  a b c Bideleux and Jeffries, 1998, p. 536.  Bideleux and Jeffries, 1998, pp. 53435.  Kaser, 1967, pp. 910.  a b Bideleux and Jeffries, 1998, p. 535.  W. Wallace and R. Clarke, Comecon, Trade, and the West , London Pinter 1986, p. 1, quoted by Bideleux and Jeffries, 1998, p. 536.  Bideleux and Jeffries, 1998, pp. 53637.  Elena Dragomir, The formation of the Soviet blocs Council for Mutual Economic Assistance Romanias involvement, Journal Cold War Studies, xiv 2012, 3447. httpwww.mitpressjournals.orgdoiabs10.1162JCWS_a_00190.VQKof9KsX65 .  Elena Dragomir, The creation of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance as seen from the Romanian Archives, in Historical Research , September 2014. httponlinelibrary.wiley.comdoi10.11111468-2281.12083abstract .  Bideleux and Jeffries, 1998, p. 53941.  Bideleux and Jeffries, 1998, pp. 54142.  a b Bideleux and Jeffries, 1998, pp. 54243.  Bideleux and Jeffries, 1998, pp. 54334.  a b Bideleux and Jeffries, 1998, p. 544.  Bideleux and Jeffries, 1998, p. 559.  Bideleux and Jeffries, 1998, p. 560.  Bideleux and Jeffries, 1998, p. 553.  Bideleux and Jeffries, 1998, pp. 56061.  a b c d e Bideleux and Jeffries, 1998, p. 561.  Bideleux and Jeffries, 1998, p. 566.  Bideleux and Jeffries, 1998, pp. 564, 566.  Bideleux and Jeffries, 1998, p. 564.  a b Bideleux and Jeffries, 1998, pp. 56869.  Bideleux and Jeffries, 1998, p. 568.  Bideleux and Jeffries, 1998, pp. 57172.  Bideleux and Jeffries, 1998, p. 579.  Abel Aganbegyan, quoted in Bideleux and Jeffries, 1998, p. 580.  Bideleux and Jeffries, 1998, p. 580.  Bideleux and Jeffries, 1998, pp. 58082 the quotation is on p. 582.  Bideleux and Jeffries, 1998, p. 582.  Smolansky, Oleg Smolansky, Bettie 1991. The USSR and Iraq The Soviet Quest for Influence . Duke University Press . p.  25. ISBN   978-0-8223-1116-4 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Zwass, 1989, p. 4  a b Bideleux and Jeffries, 1998, p. 537.  Bideleux and Jeffries, 1998, p. 538.  a b Bideleux and Jeffries, 1998, p. 539.  Bideleux and Jeffries, 1998, p. 540.  Bideleux and Jeffries, 1998, pp. 54041.  a b Bideleux and Jeffries, 1998, p. 565.  Bideleux and Jeffries, 1998, p. 569.  Bideleux and Jeffries, 1998, p. 570 makes the assertion about this being the dominant view, and cites several examples.  Bideleux and Jeffries, 1998, pp. 57071.  Zalapan projekty Prask metro  esk televize . esk televize . Archived from the original on 19 June 2010 . Retrieved 8 May 2018 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Zwass, 1989, pp. 1421  a b c Brown, J.F. 1988, Eastern Europe and Communist Rule , Duke University Press, ISBN   978-0882308418 , pp. 14556.  Bideleux and Jeffries, 1998, p. 567. References  edit   This article incorporates   public domain material from the Library of Congress Country Studies website httplcweb2.loc.govfrdcs . Robert Bideleux and Ian Jeffries, A History of Eastern Europe Crisis and Change , Routledge, 1998. ISBN   0-415-16111-8 . Brine, Jenny J., ed. Comecon the rise and fall of an international socialist organization. Vol. 3. Transaction Publishers, 1992. Crump, Laurien, and Simon Godard. Reassessing Communist International Organisations A Comparative Analysis of COMECON and the Warsaw Pact in relation to their Cold War Competitors. Contemporary European History 27.1 2018 85-109. Falk, Flade. Review of Economic Entanglements in East-Central Europe and the Comecons Position in the Global Economy 1949-1991 online at H-Soz-u-Kult, H-Net Reviews. Jam. 2013 Godard, Simon. Only One Way to Be a Communist How Biographical Trajectories Shaped Internationalism among COMECON Experts. Critique internationale 1 2015 69-83. Michael Kaser , Comecon Integration Problems of the Planned Economies , Royal Institute of International Affairs Oxford University Press, 1967. ISBN   0-192-14956-3 Lnyi, Kamilla. The collapse of the COMECON market. Russian  East European Finance and Trade 29.1 1993 68-86. online Libbey, James. CoCom, Comecon, and the Economic Cold War. Russian History 37.2 2010 133-152. Radisch, Erik. The Struggle of the Soviet Conception of Comecon, 19531975. Comparativ 27.5-6 2017 26-47. Zwass, Adam. The Council for Mutual Economic Assistance The Thorny Path from Political to Economic Integration, M.E. Sharpe, Armonk, NY 1989. External links  edit  Germany East Country Study  TOC , Data as of July 1987, Appendix B The Council for Mutual Economic Assistance , Library of Congress Call Number DD280.6 .E22 1988. v t e Eastern Bloc Soviet Union Communism Formation Secret MolotovRibbentrop Pact protocol Soviet invasion of Poland Soviet occupations Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina Baltic states Hungary Romania Yalta Conference Annexed as, or into, SSRs Eastern Finland Estonia Latvia Lithuania Memel East Prussia West Belarus Western Ukraine Moldavia Satellite states Hungarian Peoples Republic Polish Peoples Republic Czechoslovak Socialist Republic Socialist Republic of Romania German Democratic Republic Peoples Republic of Albania to 1961 Peoples Republic of Bulgaria Federal Peoples Republic of Yugoslavia to 1948 Annexing SSRs Russian SFSR Ukrainian SSR Byelorussian SSR Organizations Cominform COMECON Warsaw Pact World Federation of Trade Unions WFTU World Federation of Democratic Youth WFDY Revolts and opposition Welles Declaration Goryani Movement Forest Brothers Ukrainian Insurgent Army Operation Jungle Baltic state continuity Baltic Legations 1940 1991 Cursed soldiers Rebellion of Cazin 1950 1953 uprising in Plze 1953 East German uprising 1956 Georgian demonstrations 1956 Pozna protests 1956 Hungarian Revolution Novocherkassk massacre 1965 Yerevan demonstrations Prague Spring  Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia Brezhnev Doctrine 1968 Red Square demonstration 1968 student demonstrations in Belgrade 1968 protests in Kosovo 1970 Polish protests Croatian Spring 1972 unrest in Lithuania SSR June 1976 protests Solidarity  Soviet reaction  Martial law 1981 protests in Kosovo Reagan Doctrine Jeltoqsan Karabakh movement April 9 tragedy Romanian Revolution Black January Cold War events Marshall Plan Berlin Blockade TitoStalin Split 1948 Czechoslovak coup dtat 1961 Berlin Wall crisis Conditions Emigration and defection  list of defectors  Sovietization of the Baltic states Information dissemination Politics Economies Telephone tapping Decline Revolutions of 1989 Fall of the Berlin Wall Romanian Revolution Fall of communism in Albania Singing Revolution Collapse of the Soviet Union Dissolution of Czechoslovakia January 1991 events in Lithuania January 1991 events in Latvia Post-Cold War topics Baltic Assembly Collective Security Treaty Organization Commonwealth of Independent States Craiova Group European Union European migrant crisis Eurasian Economic Union NATO Post-Soviet states Shanghai Cooperation Organisation Visegrd Group v t e Cold War USA USSR ANZUS NATO Non-Aligned Movement SEATO Warsaw Pact Cold War II 1940s Morgenthau Plan Hukbalahap Rebellion Jamaican conflict Dekemvriana Percentages agreement Yalta Conference Guerrilla war in the Baltic states Forest Brothers Operation Priboi Operation Jungle Occupation of the Baltic states Cursed soldiers Operation Unthinkable Operation Downfall Potsdam Conference Gouzenko Affair Division of Korea Operation Masterdom Operation Beleaguer Operation Blacklist Forty Iran crisis of 1946 Greek Civil War Baruch Plan Corfu Channel incident Turkish Straits crisis Restatement of Policy on Germany First Indochina War Truman Doctrine Asian Relations Conference May 1947 Crises Marshall Plan Comecon 1948 Czechoslovak coup dtat Al-Wathbah uprising 19471949 Palestine war 19471948 Civil War in Mandatory Palestine 1948 ArabIsraeli War 1948 Palestinian exodus TitoStalin split Berlin Blockade Western betrayal Iron Curtain Eastern Bloc Western Bloc Chinese Civil War Second round Malayan Emergency Albanian Subversion 1950s Papua conflict Bamboo Curtain Korean War McCarthyism Algerian War Egyptian Revolution of 1952 1953 Iranian coup dtat Uprising of 1953 in East Germany Bricker Amendment 1954 Guatemalan coup dtat Partition of Vietnam Jebel Akhdar War Vietnam War First Taiwan Strait Crisis Cyprus Emergency Geneva Summit 1955 Bandung Conference Pozna 1956 protests Hungarian Revolution of 1956 YemeniAdenese clan violence Suez Crisis  We will bury you  Ifni War Operation Gladio Arab Cold War Syrian Crisis of 1957 1958 Lebanon crisis Iraqi 14 July Revolution Sputnik crisis Second Taiwan Strait Crisis 1959 Tibetan uprising 1959 Mosul uprising Cuban Revolution Kitchen Debate Sino-Soviet split 1960s Congo Crisis Simba rebellion 1960 U-2 incident Bay of Pigs Invasion 1960 Turkish coup dtat SovietAlbanian split IraqiKurdish conflict First IraqiKurdish War Berlin Crisis of 1961 Berlin Wall Dirty War Mexico Portuguese Colonial War Angolan War of Independence Guinea-Bissau War of Independence Mozambican War of Independence Cuban Missile Crisis El Porteazo Sino-Indian War Communist insurgency in Sarawak Iraqi Ramadan Revolution Eritrean War of Independence Sand War North Yemen Civil War Aden Emergency 1963 Syrian coup dtat Assassination of John F. Kennedy Cyprus crisis of 196364 Vietnam War Shifta War Guatemalan Civil War Colombian conflict 1964 Brazilian coup dtat Dominican Civil War Rhodesian Bush War South African Border War Transition to the New Order Indonesia Domino theory ASEAN Declaration Laotian Civil War 1966 Syrian coup dtat Argentine Revolution Korean DMZ Conflict Greek military junta of 19671974 Years of Lead Italy USS Pueblo incident Six-Day War War of Attrition Dhofar Rebellion Al-Wadiah War Biafran War Protests of 1968 French May Tlatelolco massacre Cultural Revolution Prague Spring 1968 Polish political crisis Communist insurgency in Malaysia Invasion of Czechoslovakia Iraqi Baathist Revolution 1969 Libyan coup dtat Football War Goulash Communism Sino-Soviet border conflict CPPNPANDF rebellion Corrective Move 1970s Dtente Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Black September in Jordan Corrective Movement Syria Western Sahara conflict Nicaraguan Revolution Cambodian Civil War Vietnam War Koza riot Realpolitik Ping-pong diplomacy Corrective Revolution Egypt 1971 Turkish military memorandum 1971 Sudanese coup dtat Four Power Agreement on Berlin Bangladesh Liberation War 1972 Nixon visit to China North Yemen-South Yemen Border conflict of 1972 Yemenite War of 1972 Communist insurgency in Bangladesh Eritrean Civil Wars 1973 Uruguayan coup dtat 1973 Chilean coup dtat Yom Kippur War 1973 oil crisis Carnation Revolution Spanish transition Metapolitefsi Strategic Arms Limitation Talks Second IraqiKurdish War Turkish invasion of Cyprus Angolan Civil War Mozambican Civil War Oromo conflict Ogaden War Western Sahara War Ethiopian Civil War Lebanese Civil War Sino-Albanian split CambodianVietnamese War Operation Condor Dirty War Argentina 1976 Argentine coup dtat LibyanEgyptian War UgandaTanzania War German Autumn Korean Air Lines Flight 902 NDF Rebellion ChadianLibyan conflict Yemenite War of 1979 Grand Mosque seizure Iranian Revolution Saur Revolution Sino-Vietnamese War New Jewel Movement 1979 Herat uprising Seven Days to the River Rhine Struggle against political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union 1980s SovietAfghan War 1980 and 1984 Summer Olympics boycotts Peruvian conflict 1980 Turkish coup dtat Gulf of Sidra incident Casamance conflict Ugandan Bush War Lords Resistance Army insurgency Eritrean Civil Wars 1982 EthiopianSomali Border War Ndogboyosoi War United States invasion of Grenada Able Archer 83 Star Wars IranIraq War Somali Rebellion 1986 Black Sea incident South Yemen Civil War Toyota War 1988 Black Sea bumping incident Bougainville Civil War 8888 Uprising Solidarity Soviet reaction Contras Central American crisis RYAN Korean Air Lines Flight 007 People Power Revolution Glasnost Perestroika Nagorno-Karabakh War Afghan Civil War United States invasion of Panama 1988 Polish strikes Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 Revolutions of 1989 Fall of the Berlin Wall Velvet Revolution Romanian Revolution Peaceful Revolution 1990s Mongolian Revolution of 1990 Gulf War German reunification Yemeni unification Fall of communism in Albania Breakup of Yugoslavia Dissolution of Czechoslovakia Dissolution of the Soviet Union Frozen conflicts Abkhazia China-Taiwan Korea Puerto Rico Kosovo Nagorno-Karabakh South Ossetia Transnistria Sino-Indian border dispute North Borneo dispute Foreign policy Truman Doctrine Containment Eisenhower Doctrine Domino theory Hallstein Doctrine Kennedy Doctrine Peaceful coexistence Ostpolitik Johnson Doctrine Brezhnev Doctrine Nixon Doctrine Ulbricht Doctrine Carter Doctrine Reagan Doctrine Rollback Sovereignty of Puerto Rico during the Cold War Ideologies Capitalism Liberalism Chicago school Keynesianism Monetarism Neoclassical economics Reaganomics Supply-side economics Thatcherism Communism Socialism MarxismLeninism Castroism Eurocommunism Guevarism Hoxhaism Juche Maoism Trotskyism Naxalism Stalinism Titoism Other Imperialism Anti-imperialism Nationalism Ultranationalism Chauvinism Ethnic nationalism Racism Zionism Fascism Neo-Nazism Islamism Totalitarianism Authoritarianism Autocracy Liberal democracy Illiberal democracy Guided democracy Social democracy Third-Worldism White supremacy White nationalism White separatism Apartheid Organizations NATO Warsaw Pact Andean Community ASEAN CIA Comecon EEC KGB MI6 Non-Aligned Movement SAARC Safari Club Stasi Propaganda Active measures Crusade for Freedom Izvestia Pravda Radio Free EuropeRadio Liberty Red Scare TASS Voice of America Voice of Russia Races Arms race Nuclear arms race Space Race See also Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War List of Eastern Bloc agents in the United States Soviet espionage in the United States Soviet UnionUnited States relations USSRUSA summits Russian espionage in the United States American espionage in the Soviet Union and Russian Federation RussiaNATO relations Brinkmanship CIA and the Cultural Cold War Cold War II Russian Revolution Category Commons Timeline List of conflicts v t e Treaties of Hungary 910th century age of Magyars  Legend of the white horse 894 10001301  rpd dynasty  Personal union of Hungary and Croatia 1102 HungarianByzantine Treaties 11531167 Treaty of Pressburg 1271 13021526 Middle ages to Tripartition  Treaty of Enns 1336 HungarianLithuanian Treaty 1351 HungarianNeapolitan Treaty 1352 Treaty of Zara 1358 Treaty of Lubowla 1412 Peace of Szeged 1444 Peace Treaty of Wiener Neustadt 1463 Treaty of falu 1474 Treaty of Brno 1478 Treaty of Piotrkw 1479 Peace of Olomouc 1479 Treaty of Pressburg 1491 First Congress of Vienna 1515 Dual reign , Ottoman vassalship , reconquest and Napoleonic Wars 15261848 Franco-Hungarian alliance 1526 Treaty of Nagyvrad 1538 Treaty of Gyalu 1541 Confessio Pentapolitana 1549 Treaty of Speyer 1570 Treaty of Szatmr 1711 1526-1848  Royal Hungary to Independence  Truce of Adrianople 1547 Treaty of Adrianople 1568 Treaty of Vienna 1606 Peace of Zsitvatorok 1606 Peace of Vasvr 1664 Holy League 1684 Treaty of Karlowitz 1699 Treaty of Passarowitz 1718 Pragmatic Sanction 1723 Treaty of Belgrade 1739 Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle 1748 First Partition of Poland 1772 Treaty of Sistova 1791 Treaty of Campo Formio 1797 Treaty of Schnbrunn 1809 Congress of Vienna 1815 15701711  Principality of Transylvania  Peace of Nikolsburg 1621 Treaty of Pressburg 1626 Treaty of Nymwegen 1679 Austria-Hungary to the end of World War I 18481922 Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867 CroatianHungarian Settlement 1868 League of the Three Emperors 1873 Treaty of Bern 1874 Reichstadt Agreement 1876 Budapest Convention of 1877 1877 Treaty of Berlin 1878 Dual Alliance 1879 Triple Alliance 1882 Boxer Protocol 1901 Treaty of London 1913 Armistice of Focani 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk with Ukraine 1918 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk 1918 Treaty of Bucharest 1918 Armistice of Villa Giusti 1918 Treaty of Trianon 1920 Armistice with Romania 1920 Bill of dethronement 1921 U.S.Hungarian Peace Treaty 1921 Covenant of the League of Nations 1922 Modern age 1922 Treaties of the Kingdom of Hungary 19221946 Paris Peace Treaties, 1947 Treaties of the Hungarian Peoples Republic 194989 Treaties of the Third Republic of Hungary 1989 Authority control BNE  XX144227 BNF  cb118805659 data GND  1016341-4 ISNI  0000 0001 2122 7536 LCCN  n79106441 NKC  kn20010711373 NLA  35877536 SUDOC  026586479 VIAF  51145066485666591390 WorldCat Identities via VIAF 51145066485666591390 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleComecon oldid909935520  Categories  Comecon Former international organizations Eastern Bloc Former administrative territorial entities in Europe Organizations established in 1949 Organizations disestablished in 1991 Foreign relations of Cuba Economy of Czechoslovakia Foreign relations of Czechoslovakia Hungarian Peoples Republic Mongolian Peoples Republic 20th century in Vietnam 20th century in Albania Economy of East Germany Foreign relations of East Germany Socialist Republic of Romania Peoples Republic of Bulgaria 1949 establishments in the Soviet Union 1991 disestablishments in Hungary Former polities of the Cold War Hidden categories Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors deprecated parameters Articles containing Russian-language text Pages using collapsible list with both background and text-align in titlestyle Pages using infobox country or infobox former country with the symbol caption or type parameters Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2016 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Interlanguage link template link number All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2007 Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the Library of Congress Country Studies Wikipedia articles with BNE identifiers Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with ISNI identifiers Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers Wikipedia articles with NKC identifiers Wikipedia articles with NLA identifiers Wikipedia articles with SUDOC identifiers Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers Wikipedia articles with WorldCat-VIAF identifiers