Managing editor From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search This article needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources   Managing editor     news    newspapers    books    scholar    JSTOR  March 2018   Learn how and when to remove this template message  A managing editor  ME  is a senior member of a publication s management team. Typically, the managing editor reports directly to the editor in chief and oversees all aspects of the publication. Contents 1 United States 2 United Kingdom 3 Television 4 References United States  edit  In the United States , a managing editor of a newspaper, magazine or other periodical publication oversees and coordinates the publications editorial activities. The managing editor can hire, fire, or promote staff members. Other responsibilities include creating and enforcing deadlines. Most section editors will report to the managing editor. The ME must enforce policies set by the editor in chief. It is their job to approve stories for print or final copy. On matters of controversy, the ME decides whether or not to run co ntroversial pieces. At a newspaper a managing editor usually oversees news operations while opinion pages are under separate editors. In trade book publishing, the managing editor is typically a senior executive in the production department, responsible for overall supervision of the copy-editing, typesetting, proofreading and other steps in initial production, as well as supervision of the production process for reprints of existing titles. United Kingdom  edit  In the United Kingdom a managing editor tends to manage budget, staffing, and scheduling for a publication, and may have equivalent ranking to a deputy editor in the organizations structure. Television  edit  The title also applies to the evening televised newscasts , such as those on ABC , CNN , CBS , NBC , PBS , and the FOX News Channel . The anchors of these newscasts also work as the managing editor of their newscasts.  citation needed  Responsibilities vary in different companies. The managing editor  if a station has this position  manages the more day-to-day operations of the newsroom. 1  References  edit   Liz Chuday. NABs Guide to Careers in Television PDF Second ed.. The National Association of Broadcasters. .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em v t e Journalism roles Editing Editor Copy editor Contributing editor Assignment editor Public editor Duty editor Political editor Managing editor Editor-at-large Editor-in-chief Editorial board Commissioning editor Staff Journalists reporters Columnist Blogger Meteorologist News presenter Pundit   commentator Fixer Stringer Correspondent Fact checker Food critic Gossip columnist News analyst Staff writer Photographer This journalism -related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it . v t e This job-, occupation-, or vocation-related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it . v t e Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleManaging_editor oldid884607312  Categories  Types of editors Managing editors Journalism stubs Occupation stubs Hidden categories Articles needing additional references from March 2018 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2011 All stub articles