Euclid From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Not to be confused with Euclid of Megara . For other uses, see Euclid disambiguation . Euclid Eukleides of Alexandria Born Mid-4th century BC Died Mid-3rd century BC Residence Alexandria , Hellenistic Egypt Known  for Euclidean geometry Euclids Elements Euclidean algorithm Scientific career Fields Mathematics Bramante as Euclid or Archimedes in the School of Athens . Euclid    ju k l  d   Ancient Greek    Eukleds , pronounced   eu.kle.ds  fl. 300 BC, sometimes called Euclid of Alexandria 1  to distinguish him from Euclid of Megara , was a Greek mathematician , often referred to as the founder of geometry  1  or the father of geometry. He was active in Alexandria during the reign of Ptolemy  I 323283 BC. His Elements is one of the most influential works in the history of mathematics , serving as the main textbook for teaching mathematics especially geometry  from the time of its publication until the late 19th or early 20th century. 2  3  4  In the Elements , Euclid deduced the theorems of what is now called Euclidean geometry from a small set of axioms . Euclid also wrote works on perspective , conic sections , spherical geometry , number theory , and mathematical rigour . The English name Euclid is the anglicized version of the Greek name , which means renowned, glorious. 5  Contents 1 Biography 2 Elements 2.1 Fragments 3 Other works 3.1 Lost works 4 Legacy 5 See also 6 References 6.1 Works cited 7 Further reading 8 External links Biography Very few original references to Euclid survive, so little is known about his life. He was likely born c. 325 BC, although the place and circumstances of both his birth and death are unknown and may only be estimated roughly relative to other people mentioned with him. He is rarely mentioned by name by other Greek mathematicians from Archimedes c. 287 BC  c. 212 BC onward, and is usually referred to as   the author of Elements. 6  The few historical references to Euclid were written by Proclus c. 450 AD, centuries after Euclid lived. 7  A detailed biography of Euclid is given by Arabian authors, mentioning, for example, a birth town of Tyre . This biography is generally believed to be fictitious. 8  If he came from Alexandria, he would have known the Serapeum of Alexandria , and the Library of Alexandria , and may have worked there during his time. Euclids arrival in Alexandria came about ten years after its founding by Alexander the Great , which means he arrived c. 322 BC. 9  Proclus introduces Euclid only briefly in his Commentary on the Elements . According to Proclus, Euclid supposedly belonged to Plato s persuasion and brought together the Elements , drawing on prior work of Eudoxus of Cnidus and of several pupils of Plato particularly Theaetetus and Philip of Opus . Proclus believes that Euclid is not much younger than these, and that he must have lived during the time of Ptolemy I c. 367 BC  282 BC because he was mentioned by Archimedes. Although the apparent citation of Euclid by Archimedes has been judged to be an interpolation by later editors of his works, it is still believed that Euclid wrote his works before Archimedes wrote his. 10  Proclus later retells a story that, when Ptolemy I asked if there was a shorter path to learning geometry than Euclids Elements , Euclid replied there is no royal road to geometry. 11  This anecdote is questionable since it is similar to a story told about Menaechmus and Alexander the Great. 12  Euclidis quae supersunt omnia 1704 Euclid died c. 270 BC, presumably in Alexandria. 9  In the only other key reference to Euclid, Pappus of Alexandria c. 320 AD briefly mentioned that Apollonius spent a very long time with the pupils of Euclid at Alexandria, and it was thus that he acquired such a scientific habit of thought c. 247222  BC. 13  14  Because the lack of biographical information is unusual for the period extensive biographies being available for most significant Greek mathematicians several centuries before and after Euclid, some researchers have proposed that Euclid was not a historical personage, and that his works were written by a team of mathematicians who took the name Euclid from Euclid of Megara  la Bourbaki . However, this hypothesis is not well accepted by scholars and there is little evidence in its favor. 15  Elements One of the oldest surviving fragments of Euclids Elements , found at Oxyrhynchus and dated to circa AD 100  P. Oxy. 29 . The diagram accompanies Book II, Proposition 5. 16  Main article Euclids Elements Although many of the results in Elements originated with earlier mathematicians, one of Euclids accomplishments was to present them in a single, logically coherent framework, making it easy to use and easy to reference, including a system of rigorous mathematical proofs that remains the basis of mathematics 23 centuries later. 17  There is no mention of Euclid in the earliest remaining copies of the Elements , and most of the copies say they are from the edition of Theon  or the lectures of Theon, 18  while the text considered to be primary, held by the Vatican, mentions no author. The only reference that historians rely on of Euclid having written the Elements was from Proclus, who briefly in his Commentary on the Elements ascribes Euclid as its author. Although best known for its geometric results, the Elements also includes number theory . It considers the connection between perfect numbers and Mersenne primes known as the EuclidEuler theorem , the infinitude of prime numbers , Euclids lemma on factorization which leads to the fundamental theorem of arithmetic on uniqueness of prime factorizations , and the Euclidean algorithm for finding the greatest common divisor of two numbers. The geometrical system described in the Elements was long known simply as geometry , and was considered to be the only geometry possible. Today, however, that system is often referred to as Euclidean geometry to distinguish it from other so-called non-Euclidean geometries that mathematicians discovered in the 19th century. Fragments See also Oxyrhynchus Papyri The Papyrus Oxyrhynchus 29 P. Oxy. 29 is a fragment of the second book of the Elements of Euclid, unearthed by Grenfell and Hunt 1897 in Oxyrhynchus . More recent scholarship suggests a date of 75125 AD. 19  The classic translation of T. L. Heath , reads 20  .mw-parser-output .templatequoteoverflowhiddenmargin1em 0padding0 40px.mw-parser-output .templatequote .templatequoteciteline-height1.5emtext-alignleftpadding-left1.6emmargin-top0 If a straight line be cut into equal and unequal segments, the rectangle contained by the unequal segments of the whole together with the square on the straight line between the points of section is equal to the square on the half. Other works Euclids construction of a regular dodecahedron . Construction of a dodecahedron by placing faces on the edges of a cube. In addition to the Elements , at least five works of Euclid have survived to the present day. They follow the same logical structure as Elements , with definitions and proved propositions. Data deals with the nature and implications of given information in geometrical problems the subject matter is closely related to the first four books of the Elements . On Divisions of Figures , which survives only partially in Arabic translation, concerns the division of geometrical figures into two or more equal parts or into parts in given ratios . It is similar to a first-century AD work by Heron of Alexandria . Catoptrics , which concerns the mathematical theory of mirrors, particularly the images formed in plane and spherical concave mirrors. The attribution is held to be anachronistic however by J J OConnor and E F Robertson who name Theon of Alexandria as a more likely author. 21  Phaenomena , a treatise on spherical astronomy , survives in Greek it is quite similar to On the Moving Sphere by Autolycus of Pitane , who flourished around 310 BC. 19th-century statue of Euclid by Joseph Durham in the Oxford University Museum of Natural History Optics is the earliest surviving Greek treatise on perspective. In its definitions Euclid follows the Platonic tradition that vision is caused by discrete rays which emanate from the eye . One important definition is the fourth Things seen under a greater angle appear greater, and those under a lesser angle less, while those under equal angles appear equal. In the 36 propositions that follow, Euclid relates the apparent size of an object to its distance from the eye and investigates the apparent shapes of cylinders and cones when viewed from different angles . Proposition 45 is interesting, proving that for any two unequal magnitudes, there is a point from which the two appear equal. Pappus believed these results to be important in astronomy and included Euclids Optics , along with his Phaenomena , in the Little Astronomy , a compendium of smaller works to be studied before the Syntaxis  Almagest  of Claudius Ptolemy . Lost works Other works are credibly attributed to Euclid, but have been lost. Conics was a work on conic sections that was later extended by Apollonius of Perga into his famous work on the subject. It is likely that the first four books of Apolloniuss work come directly from Euclid. According to Pappus, Apollonius, having completed Euclids four books of conics and added four others, handed down eight volumes of conics. The Conics of Apollonius quickly supplanted the former work, and by the time of Pappus, Euclids work was already lost. Porisms might have been an outgrowth of Euclids work with conic sections, but the exact meaning of the title is controversial. Pseudaria , or Book of Fallacies , was an elementary text about errors in reasoning . Surface Loci concerned either loci sets of points on surfaces or loci which were themselves surfaces under the latter interpretation, it has been hypothesized that the work might have dealt with quadric surfaces . Several works on mechanics are attributed to Euclid by Arabic sources. On the Heavy and the Light contains, in nine definitions and five propositions, Aristotelian notions of moving bodies and the concept of specific gravity. On the Balance treats the theory of the lever in a similarly Euclidean manner, containing one definition, two axioms, and four propositions. A third fragment, on the circles described by the ends of a moving lever, contains four propositions. These three works complement each other in such a way that it has been suggested that they are remnants of a single treatise on mechanics written by Eu clid. Legacy The European Space Agency s ESA Euclid spacecraft was named in his honor. 22  See also Axiomatic method Euclids orchard Euclidean algorithm Euclidean geometry Euclidean relation Extended Euclidean algorithm List of topics named after Euclid References  a b Bruno, Leonard C. 2003 1999. Math and Mathematicians The History of Math Discoveries Around the World . Baker, Lawrence W. Detroit, Mich. U X L. pp.   125 . ISBN   978-0-7876-3813-9 . OCLC   41497065 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Ball, pp. 5062.  Boyer, pp. 10019.  Macardle, et al. 2008. Scientists Extraordinary People Who Altered the Course of History. New York Metro Books. g. 12.  Harper, Douglas. Euclidean adj. . Online Etymology Dictionary . Retrieved March 18, 2015 .  Heath 1981, p. 357  Joyce, David. Euclid . Clark University Department of Mathematics and Computer Science. 1  OConnor, John J. Robertson, Edmund F., Euclid of Alexandria Heath 1956, p. 4 Heath 1981, p. 355.  a b Bruno, Leonard C. 2003 1999. Math and mathematicians   the history of math discoveries around the world . Baker, Lawrence W. Detroit, Mich. U X L. p.   126 . ISBN   978-0-7876-3813-9 . OCLC   41497065 .  Proclus, p. XXX  OConnor, John J. Robertson, Edmund F., Euclid of Alexandria  Proclus, p. 57  Boyer, p. 96.  Heath 1956, p. 2.  Conic Sections in Ancient Greece .  OConnor, John J. Robertson, Edmund F., Euclid of Alexandria Jean Itard 1962. Les livres arithmtiques dEuclide .  Bill Casselman . One of the Oldest Extant Diagrams from Euclid . University of British Columbia . Retrieved 2008-09-26 .  Struik p.  51 their logical structure has influenced scientific thinking perhaps more than any other text in the world.  Heath 1981, p. 360.  Fowler, David 1999. The Mathematics of Platos Academy Second ed.. Oxford Clarendon Press. ISBN   978-0-19-850258-6 .  Bill Casselman , One of the oldest extant diagrams from Euclid  OConnor, John J. Robertson, Edmund F., Theon of Alexandria  NASA Delivers Detectors for ESAs Euclid Spacecraft . NASA . 2017. Works cited .mw-parser-output .refbeginfont-size90margin-bottom0.5em.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indentsullist-style-typenonemargin-left0.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indentsulli,.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indentsdlddmargin-left0padding-left3.2emtext-indent-3.2emlist-stylenone.mw-parser-output .refbegin-100font-size100 Artmann, Benno 1999. Euclid The Creation of Mathematics . New York Springer. ISBN   0-387-98423-2 . Ball, W.W. Rouse 1960 1908. A Short Account of the History of Mathematics 4th ed.. Dover Publications. pp.  5062. ISBN   978-0-486-20630-1 . Boyer, Carl B. 1991. A History of Mathematics 2nd ed.. John Wiley  Sons, Inc. ISBN   978-0-471-54397-8 . Douglass, Charlene 2007. Page, John D. ed.. Euclid . Math Open Reference . With extensive bibliography. Heath, Thomas ed. 1956 1908. The Thirteen Books of Euclids Elements . 1 . Dover Publications. ISBN   978-0-486-60088-8 . CS1 maint extra text authors list  link  Heath, Thomas L. 1908. Euclid and the Traditions About Him . In Heath, Thomas L. ed.. Euclid, Elements . 1 . pp.  16. As reproduced in the Perseus Digital Library . Heath, Thomas L. 1981. A History of Greek Mathematics , 2 Vols. New York Dover Publications. ISBN   0-486-24073-8 , 0-486-24074-6 . Kline, Morris 1980. Mathematics The Loss of Certainty . Oxford Oxford University Press. ISBN   0-19-502754-X . OConnor, John J.  Robertson, Edmund F. , Euclid of Alexandria , MacTutor History of Mathematics archive , University of St Andrews . OConnor, John J.  Robertson, Edmund F. , Theon of Alexandria , MacTutor History of Mathematics archive , University of St Andrews . Proclus , A commentary on the First Book of Euclids Elements , translated by Glenn Raymond Morrow, Princeton University Press, 1992. ISBN   978-0-691-02090-7 . Struik, Dirk J. 1967. A Concise History of Mathematics . Dover Publications. ISBN   978-0-486-60255-4 . Van der Waerden, Bartel Leendert  Taisbak, Christian Marinus October 30, 2014. Euclid . Encyclopdia Britannica . Retrieved November 21, 2014 . Further reading DeLacy, Estelle Allen 1963. Euclid and Geometry . New York Franklin Watts. Knorr, Wilbur Richard 1975. The Evolution of the Euclidean Elements A Study of the Theory of Incommensurable Magnitudes and Its Significance for Early Greek Geometry . Dordrecht, Holland D. Reidel. ISBN   978-90-277-0509-9 . Mueller, Ian 1981. Philosophy of Mathematics and Deductive Structure in Euclids Elements . Cambridge, MA MIT Press. ISBN   978-0-262-13163-6 . Reid, Constance 1963. A Long Way from Euclid . New York Crowell. Szab, rpd 1978. The Beginnings of Greek Mathematics . A.M. Ungar, trans. Dordrecht, Holland D. Reidel. ISBN   978-90-277-0819-9 . External links Wikiquote has quotations related to Euclid Wikisource has original works written by or about Euclid Wikimedia Commons has media related to Euclid . Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopdia Britannica article Euclid . Works by Euclid at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Euclid at Internet Archive Works by Euclid at LibriVox public domain audiobooks Euclids Elements , All thirteen books, with interactive diagrams using Java. Clark University Euclids Elements , with the original Greek and an English translation on facing pages includes PDF version for printing. University of Texas . Euclids Elements, books IVI , in English pdf, in a Project Gutenberg Victorian textbook edition with diagrams. Euclids Elements , All thirteen books, in several languages as Spanish, Catalan, English, German, Portuguese, Arabic, Italian, Russian and Chinese. Elementa Geometriae 1482, Venice. From Rare Book Room . Elementa 888 AD, Byzantine. From Rare Book Room . Texts on Ancient Mathematics and Mathematical Astronomy PDF scans Note many are very large files. Includes editions and translations of Euclids Elements , Data , and Optica , Procluss Commentary on Euclid , and other historical sources. The Elements of Geometrie of the Most Auncient Philosopher Euclide of Megara 1570 from the English Printing Collection in the Rare Book and Special Collection Division at the Library of Congress v t e Ancient Greek mathematics Mathematicians timeline Anaxagoras Anthemius Archytas Aristaeus the Elder Aristarchus Apollonius Archimedes Autolycus Bion Bryson Callippus Carpus Chrysippus Cleomedes Conon Ctesibius Democritus Dicaearchus Diocles Diophantus Dinostratus Dionysodorus Domninus Eratosthenes Eudemus Euclid Eudoxus Eutocius Geminus Heron Hipparchus Hippasus Hippias Hippocrates Hypatia Hypsicles Isidore of Miletus Leon Marinus Menaechmus Menelaus Metrodorus Nicomachus Nicomedes Nicoteles Oenopides Pappus Perseus Philolaus Philon Porphyry Posidonius Proclus Ptolemy Pythagoras Serenus Simplicius Sosigenes Sporus Thales Theaetetus Theano Theodorus Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Thymaridas Xenocrates Zeno of Elea Zeno of Sidon Zenodorus Treatises Almagest Archimedes Palimpsest Arithmetica Conics Apollonius Elements Euclid On the Sizes and Distances Aristarchus On Sizes and Distances Hipparchus On the Moving Sphere Autolycus The Sand Reckoner Problems Problem of Apollonius Squaring the circle Doubling the cube Angle trisection Centers Cyrene Library of Alexandria Platonic Academy v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean civilization Greek Dark Ages Archaic period Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Alexandria Antioch Cappadocia Crete Cyprus Doris Ephesus Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Miletus Peloponnesus Pergamon Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Syracuse Thebes Politics Boule Koinon Proxeny Strategos Tagus Tyrant Amphictyonic League Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Apella Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Lydia Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Agesilaus II Agis II Alcibiades Alexander the Great Aratus Archimedes Aspasia Demosthenes Epaminondas Euclid Hipparchus Hippocrates Leonidas Lycurgus Lysander Milo of Croton Miltiades Pausanias Pericles Philip of Macedon Philopoemen Praxiteles Ptolemy Pyrrhus Solon Themistocles Groups Philosophers Playwrights Poets Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Festivals Funeral and burial practices Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology mythological figures Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation South Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Las Locri Medma Metapontion Nepolis Pandosia Lucania Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia LiparaMeligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassa Sardinia Olbia Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene  Apollonia  Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheuss Limin Illicitanus LiminPortus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zakynthos Black Sea north coast Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Eupatoria Gorgippia Hermonassa Kepoi Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Panticapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake Black Sea south coast Dionysopolis Odessos Anchialos Mesambria Apollonia Salmydessus Heraclea Tium Sesamus Cytorus Abonoteichos Sinope Zaliche Amisos Oine Polemonion Thrmae Cotyora Kerasous Tripolis Trapezous Rhizos Athina Bathus Phasis Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline Authority control BIBSYS  90205202 BNE  XX1000405 BNF  cb11901997s data GND  118638955 ISNI  0000 0001 2321 3955 LCCN  n50043341 NKC  jn20011024099 NTA  069356378 RSL  000002326 SELIBR  185706 SNAC  w6h13681 SUDOC  026854651 VIAF  176184097 WorldCat Identities via VIAF 176184097 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleEuclid oldid909689344  Categories  Euclid Ancient Greek mathematicians Ancient Alexandrians 4th-century BC Egyptian people 3rd-century people of Roman Egypt Geometers Number theorists 4th-century BC Greek people 3rd-century BC Greek people 4th-century BC writers 3rd-century BC writers 4th-century BC births 3rd-century BC deaths Hidden categories Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Articles with hCards Articles containing Ancient Greek-language text CS1 maint extra text authors list Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Wikipedia articles with BIBSYS identifiers Wikipedia articles with BNE identifiers Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with ISNI identifiers Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers Wikipedia articles with NKC identifiers Wikipedia articles with NTA identifiers Wikipedia articles with RSL identifiers Wikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiers Wikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiers Wikipedia articles with SUDOC identifiers Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers Wikipedia articles with WorldCat-VIAF identifiers