Business case From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search A business case captures the reasoning for initiating a project or task. It is often presented in a well-structured written document, but may also come in the form of a short verbal agreement or presentation . The logic of the business case is that, whenever resources such as money or effort are consumed, they should be in support of a specific business need. An example could be that a software upgrade might improve system performance , but the business case is that better performance would improve customer satisfaction , require less task processing time, or reduce system maintenance costs. A compelling business case adequately captures both the quantifiable and non-quantifiable characteristics of a proposed project. Business cases can range from comprehensive and highly structured, as required by formal project management methodologies, to informal and brief. Information included in a formal business case could be the background of the project, the expected business benefits, the options considered with reasons for rejecting or carrying forward each option, the expected costs of the project, a gap analysis and the expected risks. Consideration should also be given to the option of doing nothing including the costs and risks of inactivity. From this information, the justification for the project is derived. Note that it is not the job of the project manager to build the business case, this task is usually the responsibility of stakeholders and sponsors. 1  Contents 1 Reasons for creating a business case 2 Development and approval process 2.1 Key elements of the business case report 2.2 Review and approval 3 Public sector projects 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Reasons for creating a business case  edit  Business cases are created to help decision-makers ensure that the proposed initiative will have value and relative priority compared to alternative initiatives based on the objectives and expected benefits laid out in the business case. the performance indicators found in the business case are identified to be used for proactive realization of the business and behavioral change. Development and approval process  edit  The business case process should be designed to be adaptable  tailored to the size and risk of the proposal consistent  the same basic business issues are addressed by every project business oriented  concerned with the business capabilities and impact, rather than having a technical focus comprehensive  includes all factors relevant to a complete evaluation understandable  the contents are clearly relevant, logical and, although demanding, are simple to complete and evaluate measurable  all key aspects can be quantified so their achievement can be tracked and measured transparent  key elements can be justified directly accountable  accountability and commitments for the delivery of benefits and management of costs are clear. Key elements of the business case report  edit  A good business case report, which brings confidence and accountability into the field of making investment decisions, is a compilation of all information collected during enterprise analysis and the business case process. The key purpose is to provide evidence and justification for continuing with the investment proposition. Here is a recommended structure 2  Preface Table of Contents Executive Briefing Recommendation Summary of Results Decision to be Taken Introduction Business Drivers Scope Financial Metrics Analysis Assumptions Cash Flow Statement  NPV .. Costs Benefits Risk Strategic Options Opportunity Costs Conclusion, Recommendation, and Next Steps Appendix Review and approval  edit  At various stages in the project, the business case should be reviewed to ensure that The justification is still valid, The project will deliver the solution to the business need. The result of a review may be the termination or amendment of the project. The business case may also be subject to amendment if the review concludes that the business need has abated or changed, this will have a knock on effect on the project. Public sector projects  edit  Many public sector projects are now required to justify their need through a business case. In the public sector, the business case is argued in terms of Costbenefit analysis , which may include both financial and non-financial cost and benefits. This allows the business to take into account societal and environmental benefits, allowing a more comprehensive understanding of economic impacts. See also  edit  Business plan Case competition Innovation Optimism bias Planning fallacy Reference class forecasting Win-win Notes  edit   Building a Projects Business Case PM Hut, 8 January 2009  Source Messner, W. More on Making the Compelling Business Case GloBus Research, accessed 5 May 2013 and Messner, W. 2013 Making the Compelling Business Case . Houndmills Palgrave Macmillan. References  edit  Bentley, C. Practical Prince2 The Stationery Office, .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em ISBN   0-11-702853-3 . Five elements to include in a compelling business case Messner, W. Making the Compelling Business Case. Decision-Making Techniques for Successful Business Growth. Houndmills Palgrave Macmillan, 2013  book companion website  OGC Guidance and templates on Business Case Schaltegger, S.  Wagner, M. Eds. Managing the Business Case for Sustainability. The Integration of Social things, and Economic Performance . Sheffield Greenleaf, 2006 External links  edit  Business Case article in PRINCE2 wiki Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleBusiness_case oldid903537259  Categories  Project management