Spanish Requirement of 1513 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search This article needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources   Spanish Requirement of 1513     news    newspapers    books    scholar    JSTOR  December 2017   Learn how and when to remove this template message  The Spanish Requirement of 1513  Requerimiento  was a declaration by the Spanish monarchy , written by the Council of Castile jurist Juan Lpez de Palacios Rubios , of Castile s divinely ordained right to take possession of the territories of the New World and to subjugate, exploit and, when necessary, to fight the native inhabitants. The Requerimiento Spanish for requirement as in demand was read to Native Americans to inform them of Spains rights to conquest. 1  The Spaniards thus considered those who resisted as defying Gods plan, and so used Catholic theology to justify their conquest. 1  Contents 1 Historical context 2 Legal justification 3 Role of religion 4 Content 5 Evaluation 6 Text 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 External links Historical context  edit  In 1452, Pope Nicholas V issued the papal bull Dum Diversas , which legitimized the slave trade, at least as a result of war. It granted Afonso V of Portugal the right to reduce any Saracens, pagans and any other unbelievers to hereditary slavery. 2  However, the Dominican friars who arrived at the Spanish settlement at Santo Domingo in 1510 strongly denounced the enslavement of the local Indigenous residents. Along with other priests, they opposed the native peoples treatment as unjust and illegal in an audience with the Spanish king and in the subsequent royal commission. 3  In Spain itself in 1492, the Moorish population of Granada had been given the choice by the first Archbishop of Granada, Hernando de Talavera  become Christian, or leave the country. In a letter to his religious brothers, Cardinal Cisneros, Talaveras successor, would celebrate the peaceful domination of the Moors of the Albaicin, a neighborhood of Granada, praising converts, lauding killing and extolling plunder. This letter came, however, after centuries of struggle by Christians in Spain to recapture what they saw as their homeland, which had been under Muslim rule for generations. Thus the war in Iberia, between Christians trying to reconquer land they thought of as properly Christian and Muslims defending the land their forefathers claimed by right of conquest, heightened religious tensions and fervor on both sides. Comparing the situation in the Old World and New World  in Spains wars against the Moors , the clerics claimed that Muslims had knowledge of Christ and rejected Him, so that waging a Crusade against them was legitimate in contrast, in Spains wars against the Indigenous peoples of the Americas and Native Americans , wars against those who had never come into contact with Christianity were illegitimate. Responding to this impeding clerical position, the Requerimiento was issued, providing a religious justification for war against and conquest of the local populations of pre-existing residents, on the pretext of their refusing the legitimate authority of the Kings of Spain and Portugal as granted by the Pope. So, the Requerimiento emerged in the context of moral debates within Spanish elites over the colonization of the Americas , and associated actions such as war, slavery , Indian reductions , conversions , relocations , and war crimes. Its use was criticised by many clerical missionaries , most prominently Bartolom de las Casas . To the King and Queen of Spain  Ferdinand II of Aragon , 14521516 and Isabella I of Castile , 14511504 the conquest of indigenous peoples was justified by natural law, embodied in the medieval doctrine of just wars, which had historically been a rationale for war against non-Christians, particularly the Moors, but which would now be applied to Native Americans. Coming shortly after the Reconquest, the realization of a centuries-long dream by Christians in Spain, t he discovery, and colonization of the New World was directly affected by religious and political conditions in a now-unified Iberian Peninsula. Legal justification  edit  Concerned that Spain ensure control of the natives in the newly conquered Americas, the Reyes Catlicos, Ferdinand and Isabella, consulted theologians and jurists for religious and legal justification of Spains conquests. The treatment of the Native Americans was at first rationalized on the grounds that they were cannibals any means of subjugation were acceptable. However, some of Christopher Columbus s tactics with Native Americans had resulted in uprisings. In 1500, the king and queen again sought advice the Native Americans were declared to be free vassals. Despite their elevated status, the Native Americans remained subject to conquest in just wars. The Laws of Burgos of 1512 marked the first in a series of ordinances Ordenanzas sobre el buen tratamiento de los indios with the ostensible goal of protecting the Indians from excessive exploitation natives could celebrate holidays, be paid for their labor and receive good treatment. Similar legislation was adopted by the Junta of Valladolid in 1513 and the Junta of Madrid in 1516. However, none of the laws stopped the abuse few were charged with illegal exploitation, and punishment was rare. Role of religion  edit  The colonization of the New World by European adventurers was justified at the time on spiritual and religious grounds. In the conquest of the Americas, the Christian duty to evangelize nonbelievers took the form of conversion of Indians and other pagans at the hands of Roman Catholic priests. Christianity was also used to justify the states policy of enslavement of Indians who had resisted peaceful negotiations. To the European mind, the lands of the New World belonged to no one and could, therefore, be seized. The radical differences in thought and behavior of the Aztec and Mayan states, with their worship of entirely new, fierce gods, human sacrifice by the thousands and complete unfamiliarity with European styles of diplomacy created a sense that conquest was not a war between state s but the conquering, by a civilized, society against a ferocious, barbarous enemy. Moreover, since the native population was non-Christian, the Europeans Christian religion conferred upon them the right and indeed the obligation to take possession of the lands and the people in the name of God and the throne. More particularly, Catholic theology held that spiritual salvation took precedence over temporal and civil concerns. The conversion of pagan natives to Christianity was the rationale for and legitimized Spains conquests. Thus informed by the Spanish, the Native people of the land had to accept the supremacy of the Catholic Church and the Spanish Crown. The state was authoriz ed to enforce submission, by war if necessary. Content  edit  The 1513 Requerimiento , in relation to the Spanish invasion of the Americas and the subsequent Spanish colonization of the Americas , demanded the local populations to accept Spanish rule and allow preaching to them by Catholic missionaries on pain of war, slavery or death. The Requerimiento did not demand conversion, but the Indian Reductions through the Encomienda and Mission systems often did. 4  5  This claim provided a legal loophole for enslavement of the population as rebellious vassals if they resisted, and the document stated We emphasise that any deaths that result from this rejection of Christian rule are your fault. 6  The European view of the inherent right to conquest and domination in the New World was captured in a declaration addressed to Indian populations known as El Requerimiento The Requirement. The document was prepared by the Spanish jurist Juan Lpez Palacios Rubio , a staunch advocate of the divine right of monarchs and territorial conquest. It was first used in 1513 by Pedrarias Dvila , a Spanish explorer who had fought the Moors in Granada and later became Governor of Nicaragua . The Spanish Requirement, issued in the names of King Ferdinand and Queen Juana, his daughter, was a mixture of religious and legal justifications for the confiscation of New World territories and the subjugation of their inhabitants. At the time, it was believed that Native Americans resisted conquest and conversion for one of two reasons malice or ignorance. The Requirement w as putatively meant to eliminate ignorance. A member of the conquistadors force would read El Requerimiento in Castilian before a group of Indians on the shore, who, with or without translation, remained uncomprehending. All the regions inhabitants were thus considered to have been advised of Spains religious and legal rights to conquest and forewarned of the consequences of resisting. The true nature of the Spanish Requirement, however, was one of absolution the symbolic act of reading the d ocument relieved the crown and its agents from legal and moral responsibility for the conquest, enslavement and killing of Native Americans. Readings were often dispensed with prior to planned attacks. As the Spanish Requirement matter-of-factly sets forth, so brazenly from five centuries retrospect, God created heaven and earth, and the first man and woman from whom all are descended. God directed St Peter to establish the Roman Catholic Church. St Peters descendant, the Pope, lives in Rome. The Pope has given the New World territories to the King of Castile and directed t he conversion of the Indians. If they listen carefully, the Indians will understand and accept what is happening as just if not, Spain will make war on them. Here what the document does is to create an ontology into which these new lands and their peoples fit it is creating a place for them in the existing Spanish and European political structure and Christian belief structure. Evaluation  edit  Many critics of the conquistadors policies were appalled by the flippant nature of the Requerimiento , and Bartolom de las Casas said in response to it that he did not know whether to laugh or to cry. While the conquistadors were encouraged to use an interpreter to read the Requerimiento , it was not absolutely necessary, and in many cases, it was read out to an uncomprehending populace. In some instances, it was read to barren beaches and empty villages long after the indigenous people and communities had left, to prisoners after they were captured, and even from the decks of ships once they had just spotted the coast. Nevertheless, for the conquistadors, it provided a religious justification and rationalization for attacking and conquering the native populati on. Because of its potential to support the enrichment of the Spanish royal coffers, the Requerimiento was not generally questioned until the Spanish crown had abolished its use in 1556. 7  Text  edit  .mw-parser-output .templatequoteoverflowhiddenmargin1em 0padding0 40px.mw-parser-output .templatequote .templatequoteciteline-height1.5emtext-alignleftpadding-left1.6emmargin-top0 On behalf of the King, Don Fernando, and of Doa Juana I, his daughter, Queen of Castille and Len , subduers of the barbarous nations, we their servants notify and make known to you, as best we can, that the Lord our God, Living and Eternal, created the Heaven and the Earth, and one man and one woman, of whom you and we, all the men of the world at the time, were and are descendants, and all those who came after and before us. But, on account of the multitude which has spru ng from this man and woman in the five thousand years since the world was created, it was necessary that some men should go one way and some another, and that they should be divided into many kingdoms and provinces, for in one alone they could not be sustained. Of all these nations God our Lord gave charge to one man, called St. Peter , that he should be Lord and Superior of all the men in the world, that all should obey him, and that he should be the head of the whole Human Race, wherever men should live, and under whatever law, sect, or belief they should be and he gave him the world for his kingdom and jurisdiction . And he commanded him to place his seat in Rome, as the spot most fitting to rule the world from but also he permitted him to have his seat in any other part of the world, and to judge and govern all Christians, Moors , Jews , Gentiles , and all other Sects . This man was called Pope , as if to say, Admirable Great Father and Governor of men. The men who lived in that time obeyed that St. Peter, and took him for Lord, King, and Superior of the universe so also they have regarded the others who after him have been elected to the pontificate, and so has it been continued even till now, and will continue till the end of the world. One of these Pontiffs, who succeeded that St. Peter as Lord of the world, in the dignity and seat which I have before mentioned, made donation of these isles and Tierra-firme to the aforesaid King and Queen and to their successors, our lords, with all that there are in these territories, as is contained in certain writings which passed upon the subject as aforesaid, which you c an see if you wish. So their Highnesses are kings and lords of these islands and land of Tierra-firme by virtue of this donation and some islands, and indeed almost all those to whom this has been notified, have received and served their Highnesses, as lords and kings, in the way that subjects ought to do, with good will, without any resistance, immediately, without delay, when they were informed of the aforesaid facts. And also they received and obeyed the priests whom their Highnesses sent to preach to them and to teach them our Holy Faith  and all these, of their own free will , without any reward or condition, have become Christians, and are so, and their Highnesses have joyfully and benignantly received them, and also have commanded them to be treated as their subjects and vassals  and you too are held and obliged to do the same. Wherefore, as best we can, we ask and require you that you consider what we have said to you, and that you take the time that shall be necessary to understand and deliberate upon it, and that you acknowledge the Church as the Ruler and Superior of the whole world, and the high priest called Pope , and in his name the King and Queen Doa Juana our lords, in his place, as superiors and lords and kings of these islands and this Tierra-firme by virtue of the said donation, and that you consent and give place that these religious fathers should declare and preach to you the aforesaid. If you do so, you will do well, and that which you are obliged to do to their Highnesses, and we in their name shall receive you in all love and charity, and shall leave you, your wives, and your children, and your lands, free without servitude, that you may do with them and with yourselves freely that which you like and think best, and they shall not compel you to turn Christi ans, unless you yourselves, when informed of the truth, should wish to be converted to our Holy Catholic Faith , as almost all the inhabitants of the rest of the islands have done. And, besides this, their Highnesses award you many privileges and exemptions and will grant you many benefits. But, if you do not do this, and maliciously make delay in it, I certify to you that, with the help of God, we shall powerfully enter into your country, and shall make war against you in all ways and manners that we can, and shall subject you to the yoke and obedience of the Church and of their Highnesses we shall take you and your wives and your children, and shall make slaves of them, and as such shall sell and dispose of them as their Highnesses may command and we shall take away your goods, and shall do you all the mischief and damage that we can, as to vassals who do not obey, and refuse to receive their lord, and resist and contradict him and we protest that the deaths and losses which shall accrue from this are your fault, and not that of th eir Highnesses, or ours, nor of these cavaliers who come with us. And that we have said this to you and made this Requisition , we request the notary here present to give us his testimony in writing, and we ask the rest who are present that they should be witnesses of this Requisition. 8  See also  edit  Black Legend La Toma Indian Reductions Spanish colonization of the Americas Valladolid debate Notes  edit   a b Todorov, Tzvetan 1984 The Conquest of America. New YorkHarperPerennial  Allard, Paul 1912. Slavery and Christianity . Catholic Encyclopedia . XIV . New York Robert Appleton Company . Retrieved 4 February 2006 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Thomas, Hugh 2003. Rivers of Gold The Rise of the Spanish Empire . London Weidenfeld  Nicolson. pp.  258262. ISBN   0-297-64563-3 .  Newcomb, Steven, Pagans in the Promised Land , Fulcrum 2008, p. 32-36, ISBN   1-55591-642-2  Williams, Robert A, The American Indian in western legal thought , Oxford University Press US 1992, p. 91-93, ISBN   0-19-508002-5  Thomas, Hugh 2003. Rivers of Gold The Rise of the Spanish Empire . London Weidenfeld  Nicolson. p.  266. ISBN   0-297-64563-3 .  Williams, p. 93  Juan Lopez de Palacios Rubios. Requirimiento, 1513 . www.indiana.edu . Indiana University . Retrieved June 7, 2019 . References  edit  Gibson, Charles 1966. Spain in America . New York Harper  Row. ISBN   0061330779 . Hanke, Lewis 1949. The Spanish Struggle for Justice in the Conquest of America . Oxford University Press. Kamen, Henry 2003. Empire How Spain Became a World Power, 1492-1763 . Harper Collins. ISBN   0060194766 . McAllister, Lyle N. 1984. Spain and Portugal in the New World, 1492-1700 . University of Minnesota Press. ISBN   0816612161 . Williams, Robert A. 1990. The American Indian in Western Legal Thought The Discourses of Conquest . Oxford University Press. ISBN   0195050223 . External links  edit  Full Requerimiento text in Spanish - Todos en Espaol Galeano, Eduardo Genesis Caldern, Annie Badilla, Instituto Tecnolgico de Costa Rica, La informacin y los textos jurdicos de la colonia II. El poder poltico Latina, Revista Latina de Comunicacin Social 13 enero de 1999. Recuperado el 2 de marzo de 2008 de httpwww.ull.espublicacioneslatinaa1999c149badilla2cr.htm Hernndez, Jess Contreras, Universidad Central de Barcelona, La cara India, la cruz del 92, Gaceta de Antropologa No. 8, 1991 Recuperado el 3 de marzo de 2008 de httpwww.ugr.espwlacG08_01Jesus_Contreras_Hernandez.html La Guerra justa y el requerimiento, arteHistoria, 17 de febrero de 2008 Recuperado el 2 de marzo de 2008 de httpsweb.archive.orgweb20080309215145httpwww.artehistoria.jcyl.eshistoriacontextos1508.htm Pereira-Muro, Carmen, La conversin de los moriscos, en Culturas de Espaa , 2003, p.  92. v t e Spanish Empire Timelineimmersed Catholic Monarchs Treaty of Tordesillas Italian Wars Habsburgs Golden Age War of the League of Cognac Encomiendas New Laws in favour of the indigenous Expulsion of the Moriscos OttomanHabsburg wars French Wars of Religion Bruneian-Spanish conflict Anglo-Spanish War 15851604 Piracy in the Caribbean Eighty Years War SpanishMoro conflict Thirty Years War Franco-Spanish War 163559 Portuguese Restoration War War of the Spanish Succession Queen Annes War Bourbons Bourbon Reforms War of Jenkins Ear Treaty of Madrid 1750 Seven Years War Nootka Convention Napoleonic invasion Third Treaty of San Ildefonso Independence of Spanish continental Americas AdamsOns Treaty Liberal constitution Carlist Wars SpanishAmerican War GermanSpanish Treaty 1899 Spanish Civil War Independence of Morocco Independence of Equatorial Guinea Western Sahara conflict Territories Kingdoms of Naples , Sicily and Sardinia Milan Union with Holy Roman Empire Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg, northernmost France Franche-Comt Union with Portugal Philippines Pacific Islands Guam, Mariana, Caroline, Palau, Marshall, Micronesia, Moluccas Northern Taiwan Tidore Florida New Spain Western United States, Mexico, Central America, Spanish Caribbean Spanish Louisiana Central United States Coastal Alaska Haiti Belize Jamaica Trinidad and Tobago Venezuela, Western Guyana New Granada Panama, Colombia, Ecuador, a northernmost portion of Brazilian Amazon Peru Peru, Acre  Ro de la Plata Argentina, Paraguay, Charcas Bolivia, Banda Oriental Uruguay, Falkland Islands  Chile Equatorial Guinea North Africa  Oran , Tunis , Bjaa , Pen of Algiers , Western Sahara , Spanish Morocco , Ifni and Cape Juby  Administration Archivo de Indias Council of the Indies Cabildo Exequatur Laws of the Indies Papal bull Royal Decree of Graces Trial of residence School of Salamanca Administrative subdivisions Viceroyalties Columbian New Spain New Granada Per Ro de la Plata Audiencias Bogot Buenos Aires Caracas Charcas Concepcin Cusco Guadalajara Guatemala Lima Manila Mexico Panam Quito Santiago Santo Domingo Captaincies General Chile Cuba Guatemala Philippines Provincias Internas Puerto Rico Santo Domingo Venezuela Yucatn Governorates Castilla de Oro Cuba La Florida Luisiana New Andalusia 15011513 New Andalusia New Castile New Navarre New Toledo Paraguay Ro de la Plata Economy Currencies Dollar Real Maraved Escudo Columnario Doubloon Trade Manila galleon Spanish treasure fleet Casa de Contratacin Spanish Road Guipuzcoan Company of Caracas Barcelona Trading Company Consulate of the Sea Camino Real de Tierra Adentro Commerce Consulate of Buenos Aires Military Armies Tercio Army of Flanders Free Company of Volunteers of Catalonia Indian auxiliaries Spanish Armada Ships of the line Royalists Legin Strategists Duke of Alba Antonio de Leyva Martn de Goiti Alfonso dAvalos Garca de Toledo Osorio Duke of Savoy lvaro de Bazn the Elder John of Austria Charles Bonaventure de Longueval Pedro de Zubiaur Ambrosio Spinola Blas de Lezo Bernardo de Glvez Mariners Christopher Columbus Pinzn brothers Ferdinand Magellan Juan Sebastin Elcano Juan de la Cosa Juan Ponce de Len Miguel Lpez de Legazpi Pedro Menndez de Avils Sebastin de Ocampo lvar Nez Cabeza de Vaca Alonso de Ojeda Vasco Nez de Balboa Alonso de Salazar Andrs de Urdaneta Antonio de Ulloa Ruy Lpez de Villalobos Diego Columbus Alonso de Ercilla Nicols de Ovando Juan de Ayala Sebastin Vizcano Juan Fernndez Felipe Gonzlez de Ahedo Conquistadors Hernn Corts Francisco Pizarro Gonzalo Jimnez de Quesada Hernn Prez de Quesada Francisco Vzquez de Coronado Diego Velzquez de Cullar Pedro de Valdivia Gaspar de Portol Pere Fages i Beleta Joan Orp Pedro de Alvarado Martn de Ursa Diego de Almagro Pnfilo de Narvez Diego de Mazariegos Jernimo Luis de Cabrera Pere dAlbern i Teixidor Notable battles Old World Won Comuneros Bicocca Rome 1527 Landriano Pavia Tunis Mhlberg St. Quentin Gravelines Malta Lepanto Antwerp Azores Mons Gembloux Ostend English Armada Cape Celidonia White Mountain Breda Nrdlingen Valenciennes Ceuta Bitonto Bailn Vitoria Tetouan Alhucemas Lost Capo dOrso Vienna 1529 Preveza Siege of Castelnuovo Algiers Ceresole Balearic Islands 1558 Djerba Tunis Spanish Armada Leiden Rocroi Downs Montes Claros Passaro Manila Bay Trafalgar Somosierra Annual Mactan New World Won Tenochtitlan Cajamarca Cusco Bogot savanna Penco Mataquito Guadalupe Island Recife San Juan 1595 Bahia Colonia del Sacramento Comuneros Paraguay Cartagena de Indias Cuerno Verde Tpac Amaru II Tpac Katari Pensacola Newfoundland San Juan 1797 Lost La Noche Triste Iguape Tucapel Guiana Curalaba Comuneros New Granada Trinidad 1797 Chacabuco Boyac Carabobo Pichincha Ayacucho Guam Santiago de Cuba Asomante Spanish colonizations Canary Islands The Americas Aztec Maya Chiapas Yucatn Guatemala Petn El Salvador Honduras Nicaragua Chibchan Nations Colombia Chile Inca Philippines Other civil topics Spanish missions in the Americas Architecture Mesoamerican codices Cusco painting tradition Indochristian painting in New Spain Quito painting tradition Colonial universities in Latin America Colonial universities in the Philippines General Archive of the Indies Colonial Spanish Horse Mustang Castas Old inquisition Slavery in Spanish Empire Asiento Law of coartacin  which allowed slaves to buy their freedom, and that of others Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSpanish_Requirement_of_1513 oldid910253316  Categories  Spanish colonization of the Americas History of indigenous peoples of North America 1513 works 16th-century documents Statements government Causes of war History of Catholicism in South America Imperialist works Legal history of Spain 1513 in law Hidden categories Articles needing additional references from December 2017 All articles needing additional references