James Rumbaugh From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search James E. Rumbaugh born August 22, 1947 is an American computer scientist and object-oriented methodologist 1  who is best known for his work in creating the Object Modeling Technique OMT and the Unified Modeling Language UML. Contents 1 Biography 2 Work 3 Publications 4 References 5 External links Biography  edit  Born in Bethlehem, Pennsylvania , Rumbaugh received a B.S. in physics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology MIT, an M.S. in astronomy from the California Institute of Technology Caltech, and received a Ph.D. in computer science from MIT under Professor Jack Dennis . 1  Rumbaugh started his career in the 1960s at Digital Equipment Corporation DEC as a lead research scientist. From 1968 to 1994 he worked at the General Electric Research and Development Center developing technology, teaching, and consulting. At General Electric he also led the development of Object-modeling technique OMT, an object modeling language for software modeling and designing. In 1994, he joined Rational Software , where he worked with Ivar Jacobson and Grady Booch the Three Amigos to develop Unified Modeling Language UML. Later they merged their software development methologies, OMT, OOSE and Booch into the Rational Unified Process RUP. In 2003 he moved to IBM , after its acquisition of Rational Software. He retired in 2006. 1  He has two grown up sons and in 2009 lived in Saratoga, California with his wife. 2  Work  edit  Rumbaughs main research interests are formal description languages, semantics of computation, tools for programming productivity, and applications using complex algorithms and data structures. 1  In his graduate work at MIT, Rumbaugh contributed to the development of data flow computer architecture . His thesis described parallel programming language , parallel processor computer and a basis for a network architecture, which orients itself at data flow. 3  Rumbaugh made further contributions to Object Modeling Technique , IDEF4 , the Rational Unified Process and Unified Modeling Language . Publications  edit  Rumbaugh has written a number of books about UML and RUP together with Ivar Jacobson and Grady Booch . A selection includes 1975. A Parallel Asynchronous Computer Architecture For Data Flow Programs . MIT thesis 1991. Object-Oriented Modeling and Design . With others. Prentice Hall , .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em ISBN   0-13-629841-9 . 1996. OMT insights   perspectives on modeling from the Journal of Object-Oriented Programming . Foreword by James Coplien. 1999. Unified software development process 2005. Object-oriented modeling and design with UML References  edit   a b c d Biography on InformIT Accessed 22 Jan 2010.  Masterminds of Programming Conversations with the Creators of Major ... - Federico Biancuzzi, Chromatic - Google Books Retrieved 2016-12-12.  James E. Rumbaugh 1975 A Parallel Asynchronous Computer Architecture For Data Flow Programs . External links  edit  Wikiquote has quotations related to James Rumbaugh James Rumbaugh  Biography on InformIT v t e Software engineering Fields Computer programming Requirements engineering Software deployment Software design Software maintenance Software testing Systems analysis Formal methods Concepts Data modeling Enterprise architecture Functional specification Modeling language Orthogonality Programming paradigm Software Software archaeology Software architecture Software configuration management Software development methodology Software development process Software quality Software quality assurance Software verification and validation Structured analysis Orientations Agile Aspect-oriented Object orientation Ontology Service orientation SDLC Models Developmental Agile EUP Executable UML Incremental model Iterative model Prototype model RAD UP Scrum Spiral model V-Model Waterfall model XP Other SPICE CMMI Data model ER model Function model Information model Metamodeling Object model Systems model View model Languages IDEF UML USL SysML Software engineers Victor Basili Kent Beck Grady Booch Fred Brooks Barry Boehm Peter Chen Danese Cooper Ward Cunningham Tom DeMarco Edsger W. Dijkstra Delores M. Etter Martin Fowler Adele Goldstine Margaret Hamilton C. A. R. Hoare Lois Haibt Mary Jean Harrold Grace Hopper Watts Humphrey Michael A. Jackson Ivar Jacobson Alan Kay Nancy Leveson Stephen J. Mellor Bertrand Meyer David Parnas Trygve Reenskaug Winston W. Royce James Rumbaugh Mary Shaw Peri Tarr Elaine Weyuker Niklaus Wirth Edward Yourdon Related fields Computer science Computer engineering Project management Risk management Systems engineering Category Commons v t e Unified Modeling Language Actors Organizations Object Management Group UML Partners Persons Grady Booch Ivar Jacobson James Rumbaugh Concepts Object oriented Object-oriented programming Object-oriented analysis and design Object-oriented modeling Structure Actor Attribute Artifact Class Component Interface Object Package Profile diagram Behavior Activity Event Message Method State Use case Relationships Association Composition Dependency Generalization or Inheritance  Extensibility Profile Stereotype Other Multiplicity Diagrams Structure Class Component Composite structure Deployment Object Package Behaviour Activity State Machine Use case Interaction Communications Sequence Interaction overview Timing Derived languages Systems Modeling Language SysML UML eXchange Format UXF XML Metadata Interchange XMI Executable UML xUML Other topics Glossary of UML terms Rational Unified Process List of Unified Modeling Language tools Object Modeling in Color Authority control ACM DL  81100637433 BNF  cb12541641m data DBLP  616938 GND  172340926 ISNI  0000 0001 1662 1221 LCCN  n90646657 NDL  00474184 NKC  xx0034114 NTA  100801277 SUDOC  034688072 VIAF  66578490 WorldCat Identities via VIAF 66578490 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleJames_Rumbaugh oldid872189844  Categories  1947 births Living people Massachusetts Institute of Technology alumni California Institute of Technology alumni American technology writers American computer scientists Digital Equipment Corporation people General Electric people IBM employees American software engineers Software engineering researchers Computer science writers Unified Modeling Language People from Bethlehem, Pennsylvania People from Saratoga, California Hidden categories Wikipedia articles with ACM-DL identifiers Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers Wikipedia articles with DBLP identifiers Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with ISNI identifiers Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers Wikipedia articles with NKC identifiers Wikipedia articles with NTA identifiers Wikipedia articles with SUDOC identifiers Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers Wikipedia articles with WorldCat-VIAF identifiers