Information theory From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Not to be confused with Information science . Information theory Entropy Differential entropy Conditional entropy Joint entropy Mutual information Conditional mutual information Relative entropy Entropy rate Asymptotic equipartition property Ratedistortion theory Shannons source coding theorem Channel capacity Noisy-channel coding theorem ShannonHartley theorem v t e Information theory studies the quantification , storage , and communication of information . It was originally proposed by Claude Shannon in 1948 to find fundamental limits on signal processing and communication operations such as data compression , in a landmark paper titled  A Mathematical Theory of Communication . Its impact has been crucial to the success of the Voyager missions to deep space, the invention of the compact disc , the feasibility of mobile phones , the development of the Internet , the study of linguistics and of human perception, the understanding of black holes , and numerous other fields. The field is at the intersection of mathematics , statistics , computer science , physics , neurobiology , information engineering , and electrical engineering . The theory has also found applications in other areas, including statistical inference , natural language processing , cryptography , neurobiology , 1  human vision, 2  the evolution 3  and function 4  of molecular codes  bioinformatics , model selection in statistics, 5  thermal physics , 6  quantum computing , linguistics , plagiarism detection , 7  pattern recognition , and anomaly detection . 8  Important sub-fields of information theory include source coding , channel coding , algorithmic complexity theory , algorithmic information theory , information-theoretic security , Grey system theory and measures of information. Applications of fundamental topics of information theory include lossless data compression e.g. ZIP files , lossy data compression e.g. MP3s and JPEGs , and channel coding e.g. for DSL . Information theory is used in information retrieval , intelligence gathering , gambling , statistics , and even in musical composition . A key measure in information theory is  entropy . Entropy quantifies the amount of uncertainty involved in the value of a random variable or the outcome of a random process . For example, identifying the outcome of a fair coin flip with two equally likely outcomes provides less information lower entropy than specifying the outcome from a roll of a die with six equally likely outcomes. Some other important measures in information theory are mutual information , channel capacity , error exponents , and relative entropy . Contents 1 Overview 2 Historical background 3 Quantities of information 3.1 Entropy of an information source 3.2 Joint entropy 3.3 Conditional entropy equivocation 3.4 Mutual information transinformation 3.5 KullbackLeibler divergence information gain 3.6 Other quantities 4 Coding theory 4.1 Source theory 4.1.1 Rate 4.2 Channel capacity 4.2.1 Capacity of particular channel models 5 Applications to other fields 5.1 Intelligence uses and secrecy applications 5.2 Pseudorandom number generation 5.3 Seismic exploration 5.4 Semiotics 5.5 Miscellaneous applications 6 See also 6.1 Applications 6.2 History 6.3 Theory 6.4 Concepts 7 References 7.1 The classic work 7.2 Other journal articles 7.3 Textbooks on information theory 7.4 Other books 7.5 MOOC on information theory 8 External links Overview  edit  Information theory studies the transmission, processing, extraction, and utilization of information. Abstractly, information can be thought of as the resolution of uncertainty. In the case of communication of information over a noisy channel, this abstract concept was made concrete in 1948 by Claude Shannon in his paper  A Mathematical Theory of Communication , in which information is thought of as a set of possible messages, where the goal is to send these messages over a noisy channel, and then to have the receiver reconstruct the message with low probability of error, in spite of the channel noise. Shannons main result, the noisy-channel coding theorem showed that, in the limit of many channel uses, the rate of information that is asymptotically achievable is equal to the channel capacity , a quantity dependent merely on the statistics of the channel over which the messages are sent. 1  Information theory is closely associated with a collection of pure and applied disciplines that have been investigated and reduced to engineering practice under a variety of rubrics throughout the world over the past half century or more adaptive systems , anticipatory systems , artificial intelligence , complex systems , complexity science , cybernetics , informatics , machine learning , along with systems sciences of many descriptions. Information theory is a broad and deep mathematical theory, with equally broad and deep applications, amongst which is the vital field of coding theory . Coding theory is concerned with finding explicit methods, called codes , for increasing the efficiency and reducing the error rate of data communication over noisy channels to near the channel capacity . These codes can be roughly subdivided into data compression source coding and error-correction channel coding techniques. In the latter case, it took many years to find the methods Shannons work proved were possible. A third class of information theory codes are cryptographic algorithms both codes and ciphers . Concepts, methods and results from coding theory and information theory are widely used in cryptography and cryptanalysis . See the article ban unit for a historical application. Historical background  edit  Main article History of information theory The landmark event that established the discipline of information theory and brought it to immediate worldwide attention was the publication of Claude E. Shannon s classic paper  A Mathematical Theory of Communication  in the Bell System Technical Journal in July and October 1948. Prior to this paper, limited information-theoretic ideas had been developed at Bell Labs , all implicitly assuming events of equal probability. Harry Nyquist s 1924 paper, Certain Factors Affecting Telegraph Speed , contains a theoretical section quantifying intelligence and the line speed at which it can be transmitted by a communication system, giving the relation W  K log m recalling Boltzmanns constant , where W is the speed of transmission of intelligence, m is the number of different voltage levels to choose from at each time step, and K is a constant. Ralph Hartley s 1928 paper, Transmission of Information , uses the word information as a measurable quantity, reflecting the receivers ability to distinguish one sequence of symbols from any other, thus quantifying information as H  log S n  n log S , where S was the number of possible symbols, and n the number of symbols in a transmission. The unit of information was therefore the decimal digit , which has since sometimes been called the hartley in his honor as a unit or scale or measure of information. Alan Turing in 1940 used similar ideas as part of the statistical analysis of the breaking of the German second world war Enigma ciphers. Much of the mathematics behind information theory with events of different probabilities were developed for the field of thermodynamics by Ludwig Boltzmann and J. Willard Gibbs . Connections between information-theoretic entropy and thermodynamic entropy, including the important contributions by Rolf Landauer in the 1960s, are explored in Entropy in thermodynamics and information theory . In Shannons revolutionary and groundbreaking paper, the work for which had been substantially completed at Bell Labs by the end of 1944, Shannon for the first time introduced the qualitative and quantitative model of communication as a statistical process underlying information theory, opening with the assertion that The fundamental problem of communication is that of reproducing at one point, either exactly or approximately, a message selected at another point. With it came the ideas of the information entropy and redundancy of a source, and its relevance through the source coding theorem  the mutual information , and the channel capacity of a noisy channel, including the promise of perfect loss-free communication given by the noisy-channel coding theorem  the practical result of the ShannonHartley law for the channel capacity of a Gaussian channel  as well as the bit a new way of seeing the most fundamental unit of information. Quantities of information  edit  Main article Quantities of information Information theory is based on probability theory and statistics . Information theory often concerns itself with measures of information of the distributions associated with random variables. Important quantities of information are entropy , a measure of information in a single random variable , and mutual information , a measure of information in common between two random variables. The former quantity is a property of the probability distribution of a random variable and gives a limit on the rate at which data generated by independent samples with the given distribution can be reliably compressed . The latter is a property of the joint distribution of two random variables, and is the maximum rate of reliable communication across a noisy channel in the limit of long block lengths, when the channel statistics are determined by the joint distribution. The choice of logarithmic base in the following formulae determines the unit of information entropy that is used. A common unit of information is the bit , based on the binary logarithm . Other units include the nat , which is based on the natural logarithm , and the decimal digit , which is based on the common logarithm . In what follows, an expression of the form p log p is considered by convention to be equal to zero whenever p  0 . This is justified because lim p  0  p log  p  0 displaystyle lim _prightarrow 0plog p0 for any logarithmic base. Entropy of an information source  edit  Based on the probability mass function of each source symbol to be communicated, the Shannon entropy H , in units of bits per symbol, is given by H    i p i log 2   p i  displaystyle H-sum _ip_ilog _2p_i where p i is the probability of occurrence of the i -th possible value of the source symbol. This equation gives the entropy in the units of bits per symbol because it uses a logarithm of base 2, and this base-2 measure of entropy has sometimes been called the  shannon  in his honor. Entropy is also commonly computed using the natural logarithm base e , where e is Eulers number , which produces a measurement of entropy in  nats  per symbol and sometimes simplifies the analysis by avoiding the need to include extra constants in the formulas. Other bases are also possible, but less commonly used. For example, a logarithm of base 2 8  256 will produce a measurement in bytes per symbol, and a logarithm of base 10 will produce a measurement in decimal digits or hartleys per symbol. Intuitively, the entropy H X of a discrete random variable X is a measure of the amount of uncertainty associated with the value of X when only its distribution is known. The entropy of a source that emits a sequence of N symbols that are independent and identically distributed iid is N  H bits per message of N symbols. If the source data symbols are identically distributed but not independent, the entropy of a message of length N will be less than N  H . The entropy of a Bernoulli trial as a function of success probability, often called the binary entropy function , H b  p  . The entropy is maximized at 1 bit per trial when the two possible outcomes are equally probable, as in an unbiased coin toss. If one transmits 1000 bits 0s and 1s, and the value of each of these bits is known to the receiver has a specific value with certainty ahead of transmission, it is clear that no information is transmitted. If, however, each bit is independently equally likely to be 0 or 1, 1000 shannons of information more often called bits have been transmitted. Between these two extre mes, information can be quantified as follows. If  is the set of all messages  x 1 , ..., x n  that X could be, and p  x  is the probability of some x  X displaystyle xin mathbb X  , then the entropy, H , of X is defined 9  H  X   E X  I  x      x  X p  x  log  p  x  . displaystyle HXmathbb E _XIx-sum _xin mathbb X pxlog px. Here, I  x  is the self-information , which is the entropy contribution of an individual message, and  X is the expected value . A property of entropy is that it is maximized when all the messages in the message space are equiprobable p  x   1 n  i.e., most unpredictable, in which case H  X   log n . The special case of information entropy for a random variable with two outcomes is the binary entropy function , usually taken to the logarithmic base 2, thus having the shannon Sh as unit H b  p    p log 2  p   1  p  log 2   1  p  . displaystyle H_mathrm b p-plog _2p-1-plog _21-p. Joint entropy  edit  The joint entropy of two discrete random variables X and Y is merely the entropy of their pairing  X , Y  . This implies that if X and Y are independent , then their joint entropy is the sum of their individual entropies. For example, if  X , Y  represents the position of a chess piece  X the row and Y the column, then the joint entropy of the row of the piece and the column of the piece will be the entropy of the position of the piece. H  X , Y   E X , Y   log  p  x , y      x , y p  x , y  log  p  x , y  displaystyle HX,Ymathbb E _X,Y-log px,y-sum _x,ypx,ylog px,y, Despite similar notation, joint entropy should not be confused with cross entropy . Conditional entropy equivocation  edit  The conditional entropy or conditional uncertainty of X given random variable Y also called the equivocation of X about Y  is the average conditional entropy over Y  10  H  X  Y   E Y  H  X  y      y  Y p  y   x  X p  x  y  log  p  x  y     x , y p  x , y  log  p  x  y  . displaystyle HXYmathbb E _YHXy-sum _yin Ypysum _xin Xpxylog pxy-sum _x,ypx,ylog pxy. Because entropy can be conditioned on a random variable or on that random variable being a certain value, care should be taken not to confuse these two definitions of conditional entropy, the former of which is in more common use. A basic property of this form of conditional entropy is that H  X  Y   H  X , Y   H  Y  . displaystyle HXYHX,Y-HY., Mutual information transinformation  edit  Mutual information measures the amount of information that can be obtained about one random variable by observing another. It is important in communication where it can be used to maximize the amount of information shared between sent and received signals. The mutual information of X relative to Y is given by I  X  Y   E X , Y  S I  x , y     x , y p  x , y  log  p  x , y  p  x  p  y  displaystyle IXYmathbb E _X,YSIx,ysum _x,ypx,ylog frac px,ypx,py where SI  S pecific mutual I nformation is the pointwise mutual information . A basic property of the mutual information is that I  X  Y   H  X   H  X  Y  . displaystyle IXYHX-HXY., That is, knowing Y , we can save an average of I  X  Y  bits in encoding X compared to not knowing Y . Mutual information is symmetric  I  X  Y   I  Y  X   H  X   H  Y   H  X , Y  . displaystyle IXYIYXHXHY-HX,Y., Mutual information can be expressed as the average KullbackLeibler divergence information gain between the posterior probability distribution of X given the value of Y and the prior distribution on X  I  X  Y   E p  y   D K L  p  X  Y  y   p  X    . displaystyle IXYmathbb E _pyD_mathrm KL pXYypX. In other words, this is a measure of how much, on the average, the probability distribution on X will change if we are given the value of Y . This is often recalculated as the divergence from the product of the marginal distributions to the actual joint distribution I  X  Y   D K L  p  X , Y   p  X  p  Y   . displaystyle IXYD_mathrm KL pX,YpXpY. Mutual information is closely related to the log-likelihood ratio test in the context of contingency tables and the multinomial distribution and to Pearsons  2 test  mutual information can be considered a statistic for assessing independence between a pair of variables, and has a well-specified asymptotic distribution. KullbackLeibler divergence information gain  edit  The KullbackLeibler divergence or information divergence , information gain , or relative entropy  is a way of comparing two distributions a true probability distribution pX , and an arbitrary probability distribution qX . If we compress data in a manner that assumes qX is the distribution underlying some data, when, in reality, pX is the correct distribution, the KullbackLeibler divergence is the number of average additional bits per datum necessary for compression. It is thus defined D K L  p  X   q  X     x  X  p  x  log  q  x    x  X  p  x  log  p  x    x  X p  x  log  p  x  q  x  . displaystyle D_mathrm KL pXqXsum _xin X-pxlog qx,-,sum _xin X-pxlog pxsum _xin Xpxlog frac pxqx. Although it is sometimes used as a distance metric, KL divergence is not a true metric since it is not symmetric and does not satisfy the triangle inequality making it a semi-quasimetric. Another interpretation of the KL divergence is the unnecessary surprise introduced by a prior from the truth suppose a number X is about to be drawn randomly from a discrete set with probability distribution px . If Alice knows the true distribution px , while Bob believes has a prior  that the distribution is qx , then Bob will be more surprised than Alice, on average, upon seeing the value of X . The KL divergence is the objective expected value of Bobs subjective surprisal minus Alices surprisal, measured in bits if the log is in base 2. In this way, the extent to which Bobs prior is wrong can be quantified in terms of how unnecessarily surprised it is expected to make him. Other quantities  edit  Other important information theoretic quantities include Rnyi entropy a generalization of entropy, differential entropy a generalization of quantities of information to continuous distributions, and the conditional mutual information . Coding theory  edit  Main article Coding theory A picture showing scratches on the readable surface of a CD-R. Music and data CDs are coded using error correcting codes and thus can still be read even if they have minor scratches using error detection and correction . Coding theory is one of the most important and direct applications of information theory. It can be subdivided into source coding theory and channel coding theory. Using a statistical description for data, information theory quantifies the number of bits needed to describe the data, which is the information entropy of the source. Data compression source coding There are two formulations for the compression problem lossless data compression  the data must be reconstructed exactly lossy data compression  allocates bits needed to reconstruct the data, within a specified fidelity level measured by a distortion function. This subset of information theory is called ratedistortion theory . Error-correcting codes channel coding While data compression removes as much redundancy as possible, an error correcting code adds just the right kind of redundancy i.e., error correction  needed to transmit the data efficiently and faithfully across a noisy channel. This division of coding theory into compression and transmission is justified by the information transmission theorems, or sourcechannel separation theorems that justify the use of bits as the universal currency for information in many contexts. However, these theorems only hold in the situation where one transmitting user wishes to communicate to one receiving user. In scenar ios with more than one transmitter the multiple-access channel, more than one receiver the broadcast channel  or intermediary helpers the relay channel , or more general networks , compression followed by transmission may no longer be optimal. Network information theory refers to these multi-agent communication models. Source theory  edit  Any process that generates successive messages can be considered a source of information. A memoryless source is one in which each message is an independent identically distributed random variable , whereas the properties of ergodicity and stationarity impose less restrictive constraints. All such sources are stochastic . These terms are well studied in their own right outside information theory. Rate  edit  Information rate is the average entropy per symbol. For memoryless sources, this is merely the entropy of each symbol, while, in the case of a stationary stochastic process, it is r  lim n   H  X n  X n  1 , X n  2 , X n  3 ,    displaystyle rlim _nto infty HX_nX_n-1,X_n-2,X_n-3,ldots  that is, the conditional entropy of a symbol given all the previous symbols generated. For the more general case of a process that is not necessarily stationary, the average rate is r  lim n   1 n H  X 1 , X 2 ,  X n   displaystyle rlim _nto infty frac 1nHX_1,X_2,dots X_n that is, the limit of the joint entropy per symbol. For stationary sources, these two expressions give the same result. 11  It is common in information theory to speak of the rate or entropy of a language. This is appropriate, for example, when the source of information is English prose. The rate of a source of information is related to its redundancy and how well it can be compressed , the subject of source coding . Channel capacity  edit  Main article Channel capacity Communications over a channelsuch as an ethernet cable is the primary motivation of information theory. As anyone whos ever used a telephone mobile or landline knows, however, such channels often fail to produce exact reconstruction of a signal noise, periods of silence, and other forms of signal corruption often degrade quality. Consider the communications process over a discrete channel. A simple model of the process is shown below Here X represents the space of messages transmitted, and Y the space of messages received during a unit time over our channel. Let p  y  x  be the conditional probability distribution function of Y given X . We will consider p  y  x  to be an inherent fixed property of our communications channel representing the nature of the noise of our channel. Then the joint distribution of X and Y is completely determined by our channel and by our choice of f  x  , the marginal distribution of messages we choose to send over the channel. Under these constraints, we would like to maximize the rate of information, or the signal , we can communicate over the channel. The appropriate measure for this is the mutual information , and this maximum mutual information is called the channel capacity and is given by C  max f I  X  Y  . displaystyle Cmax _fIXY. This capacity has the following property related to communicating at information rate R where R is usually bits per symbol. For any information rate R  C and coding error   0, for large enough N , there exists a code of length N and rate  R and a decoding algorithm, such that the maximal probability of block error is   that is, it is always possible to transmit with arbitrarily small block error. In addition, for any rate R  C , it is impossible to transmit with arbitrarily small block error. Channel coding is concerned with finding such nearly optimal codes that can be used to transmit data over a noisy channel with a small coding error at a rate near the channel capacity. Capacity of particular channel models  edit  A continuous-time analog communications channel subject to Gaussian noise  see ShannonHartley theorem . A binary symmetric channel BSC with crossover probability p is a binary input, binary output channel that flips the input bit with probability p . The BSC has a capacity of 1  H b  p  bits per channel use, where H b is the binary entropy function to the base-2 logarithm A binary erasure channel BEC with erasure probability p is a binary input, ternary output channel. The possible channel outputs are 0, 1, and a third symbol e called an erasure. The erasure represents complete loss of information about an input bit. The capacity of the BEC is 1  p bits per channel use. Applications to other fields  edit  Intelligence uses and secrecy applications  edit  Information theoretic concepts apply to cryptography and cryptanalysis . Turing s information unit, the ban , was used in the Ultra project, breaking the German Enigma machine code and hastening the end of World War II in Europe . Shannon himself defined an important concept now called the unicity distance . Based on the redundancy of the plaintext , it attempts to give a minimum amount of ciphertext necessary to ensure unique decipherability. Information theory leads us to believe it is much more difficult to keep secrets than it might first appear. A brute force attack can break systems based on asymmetric key algorithms or on most commonly used methods of symmetric key algorithms sometimes called secret key algorithms, such as block ciphers . The security of all such methods currently comes from the assumption that no known attack can break them in a practical amount of time. Information theoretic security refers to methods such as the one-time pad that are not vulnerable to such brute force attacks. In such cases, the positive conditional mutual information between the plaintext and ciphertext conditioned on the key  can ensure proper transmission, while the unconditional mutual information between the plaintext and ciphertext remains zero, resulting in absolutely secure communications. In other words, an eavesdropper would not be able to improve his or her guess of the plaintext by gaining knowledge of the ciphertext but not of the key. However, as in any other cryptographic system, car e must be used to correctly apply even information-theoretically secure methods the Venona project was able to crack the one-time pads of the Soviet Union due to their improper reuse of key material. Pseudorandom number generation  edit  Pseudorandom number generators are widely available in computer language libraries and application programs. They are, almost universally, unsuited to cryptographic use as they do not evade the deterministic nature of modern computer equipment and software. A class of improved random number generators is termed cryptographically secure pseudorandom number generators , but even they require random seeds external to the software to work as intended. These can be obtained via extractors , if done carefully. The measure of sufficient randomness in extractors is min-entropy , a value related to Shannon entropy through Rnyi entropy  Rnyi entropy is also used in evaluating randomness in cryptographic systems. Although related, the distinctions among these measures mean that a random variable with high Shannon entropy is not necessarily satisfactory for use in an extractor and so for cryptography uses. Seismic exploration  edit  One early commercial application of information theory was in the field of seismic oil exploration. Work in this field made it possible to strip off and separate the unwanted noise from the desired seismic signal. Information theory and digital signal processing offer a major improvement of resolution and image clarity over previous analog methods. 12  Semiotics  edit  Semioticians Doede Nauta and Winfried Nth both considered Charles Sanders Peirce as having created a theory of information in his works on semiotics. 13   171 14   137 Nauta defined semiotic information theory as the study of the internal processes of coding, filtering, and information processing. 13   91 Concepts from information theory such as redundancy and code control have been used by semioticians such as Umberto Eco and Ferruccio Rossi-Landi to explain ideology as a form of message transmission whereby a dominant social class emits its message by using signs that exhibit a high degree of redundancy such that only one message is decoded among a selection of competing ones. 15  Miscellaneous applications  edit  Information theory also has applications in gambling and investing , black holes , and bioinformatics . See also  edit  Mathematics portal Algorithmic probability Bayesian inference Communication theory Constructor theory - a generalization of information theory that includes quantum information Inductive probability Info-metrics Minimum message length Minimum description length List of important publications Philosophy of information Applications  edit  Active networking Cryptanalysis Cryptography Cybernetics Entropy in thermodynamics and information theory Gambling Intelligence information gathering Seismic exploration History  edit  Hartley, R.V.L. History of information theory Shannon, C.E. Timeline of information theory Yockey, H.P. Theory  edit  Coding theory Detection theory Estimation theory Fisher information Information algebra Information asymmetry Information field theory Information geometry Information theory and measure theory Kolmogorov complexity List of unsolved problems in information theory Logic of information Network coding Philosophy of information Quantum information science Source coding Concepts  edit  Ban unit Channel capacity Communication channel Communication source Conditional entropy Covert channel Decoder Differential entropy Encoder Fungible information Information entropy Joint entropy KullbackLeibler divergence Mutual information Pointwise mutual information PMI Receiver information theory Redundancy Rnyi entropy Self-information Unicity distance Variety Hamming distance References  edit   a b F. Rieke D. Warland R Ruyter van Steveninck W Bialek 1997. Spikes Exploring the Neural Code . The MIT press. ISBN   978-0262681087 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Delgado-Bonal, Alfonso Martn-Torres, Javier 2016-11-03. Human vision is determined based on information theory . Scientific Reports . 6 1. Bibcode  2016NatSR...636038D . doi  10.1038srep36038 . ISSN   2045-2322 . PMC   5093619 .  cf Huelsenbeck, J. P. Ronquist, F. Nielsen, R. Bollback, J. P. 2001. Bayesian inference of phylogeny and its impact on evolutionary biology. Science . 294 5550 23102314. Bibcode  2001Sci...294.2310H . doi  10.1126science.1065889 .  Allikmets, Rando Wasserman, Wyeth W. Hutchinson, Amy Smallwood, Philip Nathans, Jeremy Rogan, Peter K. 1998. Thomas D. Schneider , Michael Dean 1998 Organization of the ABCR gene analysis of promoter and splice junction sequences . Gene . 215 1 111122. doi  10.1016s0378-11199800269-8 .  Burnham, K. P. and Anderson D. R. 2002 Model Selection and Multimodel Inference A Practical Information-Theoretic Approach, Second Edition Springer Science, New York ISBN   978-0-387-95364-9 .  Jaynes, E. T. 1957. Information Theory and Statistical Mechanics . Phys. Rev . 106 4 620. Bibcode  1957PhRv..106..620J . doi  10.1103physrev.106.620 .  Bennett, Charles H. Li, Ming Ma, Bin 2003. Chain Letters and Evolutionary Histories . Scientific American . 288 6 7681. Bibcode  2003SciAm.288f..76B . doi  10.1038scientificamerican0603-76 . PMID   12764940 .  David R. Anderson November 1, 2003. Some background on why people in the empirical sciences may want to better understand the information-theoretic methods PDF . Archived from the original pdf on July 23, 2011 . Retrieved 2010-06-23 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Fazlollah M. Reza 1994 1961. An Introduction to Information Theory . Dover Publications, Inc., New York. ISBN   0-486-68210-2 .  Robert B. Ash 1990 1965. Information Theory . Dover Publications, Inc. ISBN   0-486-66521-6 .  Jerry D. Gibson 1998. Digital Compression for Multimedia Principles and Standards . Morgan Kaufmann. ISBN   1-55860-369-7 .  The Corporation and Innovation , Haggerty, Patrick, Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 2, 97-118 1981  a b Nauta, Doede 1972. The Meaning of Information . The Hague Mouton. ISBN   9789027919960 .  Nth, Winfried January 2012. Charles S. Peirces theory of information a theory of the growth of symbols and of knowledge . Cybernetics and Human Knowing . 19 12 137161.  Nth, Winfried 1981.  Semiotics of ideology . Semiotica , Issue 148. The classic work  edit  .mw-parser-output .refbeginfont-size90margin-bottom0.5em.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indentsullist-style-typenonemargin-left0.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indentsulli,.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indentsdlddmargin-left0padding-left3.2emtext-indent-3.2emlist-stylenone.mw-parser-output .refbegin-100font-size100 Shannon, C.E. 1948,  A Mathematical Theory of Communication , Bell System Technical Journal , 27, pp.  379423  623656, July  October, 1948. PDF. Notes and other formats. R.V.L. Hartley, Transmission of Information , Bell System Technical Journal , July 1928 Andrey Kolmogorov 1968,  Three approaches to the quantitative definition of information  in International Journal of Computer Mathematics. Other journal articles  edit  J. L. Kelly, Jr., Betbubbles.com , A New Interpretation of Information Rate Bell System Technical Journal , Vol. 35, July 1956, pp.  91726. R. Landauer, IEEE.org , Information is Physical Proc. Workshop on Physics and Computation PhysComp92 IEEE Comp. Sci.Press, Los Alamitos, 1993 pp.  14. R. Landauer, IBM.com , Irreversibility and Heat Generation in the Computing Process IBM J. Res. Dev. Vol. 5, No. 3, 1961 Timme, Nicholas Alford, Wesley Flecker, Benjamin Beggs, John M. 2012. Multivariate information measures an experimentalists perspective. arXiv  1111.6857  cs.IT . Textbooks on information theory  edit  Arndt, C. Information Measures, Information and its Description in Science and Engineering Springer Series Signals and Communication Technology, 2004, ISBN   978-3-540-40855-0 Ash, RB. Information Theory . New York Interscience, 1965. ISBN   0-470-03445-9 . New York Dover 1990. ISBN   0-486-66521-6 Gallager, R . Information Theory and Reliable Communication. New York John Wiley and Sons, 1968. ISBN   0-471-29048-3 Goldman, S. Information Theory . New York Prentice Hall, 1953. New York Dover 1968 ISBN   0-486-62209-6 , 2005 ISBN   0-486-44271-3 Cover, Thomas  Thomas, Joy A. 2006. Elements of information theory 2nd ed.. New York Wiley-Interscience . ISBN   0-471-24195-4 . Csiszar, I , Korner, J. Information Theory Coding Theorems for Discrete Memoryless Systems Akademiai Kiado 2nd edition, 1997. ISBN   963-05-7440-3 MacKay, David J. C. . Information Theory, Inference, and Learning Algorithms Cambridge Cambridge University Press, 2003. ISBN   0-521-64298-1 Mansuripur, M. Introduction to Information Theory . New York Prentice Hall, 1987. ISBN   0-13-484668-0 McEliece, R . The Theory of Information and Coding. Cambridge, 2002. ISBN   978-0521831857 Pierce, JR. An introduction to information theory symbols, signals and noise. Dover 2nd Edition. 1961 reprinted by Dover 1980. Reza, F . An Introduction to Information Theory . New York McGraw-Hill 1961. New York Dover 1994. ISBN   0-486-68210-2 Shannon, Claude  Weaver, Warren 1949. The Mathematical Theory of Communication PDF . Urbana, Illinois  University of Illinois Press . ISBN   0-252-72548-4 . LCCN   49-11922 . Stone, JV. Chapter 1 of book Information Theory A Tutorial Introduction , University of Sheffield, England, 2014. ISBN   978-0956372857 . Yeung, RW. A First Course in Information Theory Kluwer AcademicPlenum Publishers, 2002. ISBN   0-306-46791-7 . Yeung, RW. Information Theory and Network Coding Springer 2008, 2002. ISBN   978-0-387-79233-0 Other books  edit  Leon Brillouin, Science and Information Theory , Mineola, N.Y. Dover, 1956, 1962 2004. ISBN   0-486-43918-6 James Gleick , The Information A History, a Theory, a Flood , New York Pantheon, 2011. ISBN   978-0-375-42372-7 A. I. Khinchin, Mathematical Foundations of Information Theory , New York Dover, 1957. ISBN   0-486-60434-9 H. S. Leff and A. F. Rex, Editors, Maxwells Demon Entropy, Information, Computing , Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey 1990. ISBN   0-691-08727-X Robert K. Logan . What is Information - Propagating Organization in the Biosphere, the Symbolosphere, the Technosphere and the Econosphere , Toronto DEMO Publishing. Tom Siegfried, The Bit and the Pendulum , Wiley, 2000. ISBN   0-471-32174-5 Charles Seife, Decoding the Universe , Viking, 2006. ISBN   0-670-03441-X Jeremy Campbell, Grammatical Man , TouchstoneSimon  Schuster, 1982, ISBN   0-671-44062-4 Henri Theil, Economics and Information Theory , Rand McNally  Company - Chicago, 1967. Escolano, Suau, Bonev, Information Theory in Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , Springer, 2009. ISBN   978-1-84882-296-2 Vlatko Vedral, Decoding Reality The Universe as Quantum Information , Oxford University Press 2010. ISBN   0-19-923769-7 MOOC on information theory  edit  Raymond W. Yeung,  Information Theory   The Chinese University of Hong Kong  External links  edit  Wikiquote has quotations related to Information theory Library resources about Information theory Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Hazewinkel, Michiel , ed. 2001 1994, Information , Encyclopedia of Mathematics , Springer ScienceBusiness Media B.V.  Kluwer Academic Publishers, ISBN   978-1-55608-010-4 Lambert F. L. 1999,  Shuffled Cards, Messy Desks, and Disorderly Dorm Rooms - Examples of Entropy Increase Nonsense , Journal of Chemical Education IEEE Information Theory Society and ITSOC Monographs, Surveys, and Reviews v t e Subfields of and cyberneticians involved in cybernetics Subfields Polycontexturality Second-order cybernetics Catastrophe theory Connectionism Control theory Cybernetics in the Soviet Union Decision theory Engineering cybernetics Information theory Semiotics Synergetics Biological cybernetics Biosemiotics Biomedical cybernetics Biorobotics Computational neuroscience Homeostasis Management cybernetics Medical cybernetics Neurocybernetics Sociocybernetics Emergence Artificial intelligence Cyberneticians Maleyka Abbaszadeh Igor Aleksander William Ross Ashby Gregory Bateson Anthony Stafford Beer Natalia Bekhtereva Claude Bernard Ludwig von Bertalanffy Valentin Braitenberg Gordon S. Brown Walter Bradford Cannon Manfred Clynes Heinz von Foerster Charles Franois Jay Wright Forrester Jacque Fresco Buckminster Fuller Ranulph Glanville Ernst von Glasersfeld Pyotr Grigorenko N. Katherine Hayles Francis Heylighen Erich von Holst Jason Jixuan Hu Cliff Joslyn Stuart Kauffman Sergei P. Kurdyumov Allenna Leonard Alexander Lerner Niklas Luhmann Alexey Lyapunov Warren McCulloch Humberto Maturana Marian Mazur Margaret Mead Ulla Mitzdorf Talcott Parsons Gordon Pask Walter Pitts Qian Xuesen Alfred Radcliffe-Brown I. A. Richards Robert Trappl Valentin Turchin Jakob von Uexkll Stuart Umpleby Francisco Varela Frederic Vester Charles Geoffrey Vickers John N. Warfield William Grey Walter Kevin Warwick Norbert Wiener Jennifer Wilby Anthony Wilden v t e Data compression methods Lossless Entropy type Arithmetic Asymmetric numeral systems Golomb Huffman Adaptive Canonical Modified Range Shannon ShannonFano ShannonFanoElias Tunstall Unary Universal Exp-Golomb Fibonacci Gamma Levenshtein Dictionary type Byte pair encoding LempelZiv Brotli DEFLATE LZ4 LZFSE LZJB LZMA LZO LZRW LZS LZSS LZW LZWL LZX Snappy Zstandard Other types BWT CTW Delta DMC MTF PAQ PPM RLE Audio Concepts Bit rate ABR CBR VBR Companding Convolution Dynamic range Latency NyquistShannon theorem Sampling Sound quality Speech coding Sub-band coding Codec parts A-law -law DPCM ADPCM FT FFT LPC ACELP CELP LAR LSP WLPC MDCT Psychoacoustic model Image Concepts Chroma subsampling Coding tree unit Color space Compression artifact Image resolution Macroblock Pixel PSNR Quantization Standard test image Methods Chain code DCT EZW Fractal KLT LP RLE SPIHT Wavelet Video Concepts Bit rate ABR CBR VBR Display resolution Frame Frame rate Frame types Interlace Video characteristics Video quality Codec parts DCT Deblocking filter Lapped transform Motion compensation Theory Entropy Information theory Timeline Kolmogorov complexity Lossy DCT Quantization Ratedistortion Redundancy Compression formats Compression software codecs v t e Areas of mathematics Foundations Category theory Information theory Mathematical logic Philosophy of mathematics Set theory Algebra Abstract Elementary Linear Multilinear Analysis Calculus Real analysis Complex analysis Differential equations Functional analysis Discrete Combinatorics Graph theory Order theory Game theory Geometry Algebraic Analytic Differential Discrete Euclidean Finite Number theory Arithmetic Algebraic number theory Analytic number theory Diophantine geometry Topology Algebraic Differential Geometric Applied Control theory Mathematical biology Mathematical chemistry Mathematical economics Mathematical finance Mathematical physics Mathematical psychology Mathematical statistics Probability Statistics Computational Computer science Theory of computation Numerical analysis Optimization Computer algebra Others History of mathematics Recreational mathematics Mathematics and art Mathematics education Category Portal Commons WikiProject v t e Computer science Note This template roughly follows the 2012 ACM Computing Classification System . Hardware Printed circuit board Peripheral Integrated circuit Very Large Scale Integration Systems on Chip SoCs Energy consumption Green computing Electronic design automation Hardware acceleration Computer systems organization Computer architecture Embedded system Real-time computing Dependability Networks Network architecture Network protocol Network components Network scheduler Network performance evaluation Network service Software organization Interpreter Middleware Virtual machine Operating system Software quality Software notations and tools Programming paradigm Programming language Compiler Domain-specific language Modeling language Software framework Integrated development environment Software configuration management Software library Software repository Software development Software development process Requirements analysis Software design Software construction Software deployment Software maintenance Programming team Open-source model Theory of computation Model of computation Formal language Automata theory Computational complexity theory Logic Semantics Algorithms Algorithm design Analysis of algorithms Algorithmic efficiency Randomized algorithm Computational geometry Mathematics of computing Discrete mathematics Probability Statistics Mathematical software Information theory Mathematical analysis Numerical analysis Information systems Database management system Information storage systems Enterprise information system Social information systems Geographic information system Decision support system Process control system Multimedia information system Data mining Digital library Computing platform Digital marketing World Wide Web Information retrieval Security Cryptography Formal methods Security services Intrusion detection system Hardware security Network security Information security Application security Humancomputer interaction Interaction design Social computing Ubiquitous computing Visualization Accessibility Concurrency Concurrent computing Parallel computing Distributed computing Multithreading Multiprocessing Artificial intelligence Natural language processing Knowledge representation and reasoning Computer vision Automated planning and scheduling Search methodology Control method Philosophy of artificial intelligence Distributed artificial intelligence Machine learning Supervised learning Unsupervised learning Reinforcement learning Multi-task learning Cross-validation Graphics Animation Rendering Image manipulation Graphics processing unit Mixed reality Virtual reality Image compression Solid modeling Applied computing E-commerce Enterprise software Computational mathematics Computational physics Computational chemistry Computational biology Computational social science Computational engineering Computational healthcare Digital art Electronic publishing Cyberwarfare Electronic voting Video games Word processing Operations research Educational technology Document management Book Category Portal Outline WikiProject Commons Authority control GND  4026927-9 NDL  00575012 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleInformation_theory oldid912194803  Categories  Information theory Cybernetics Formal sciences Information Age Hidden categories CS1 errors deprecated parameters Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers