Electronic engineering From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Printed circuit board Electronic engineering also called electronics and communications engineering  is an electrical engineering discipline which utilizes nonlinear and active electrical components such as semiconductor devices , especially transistors , diodes and integrated circuits  to design electronic circuits , devices , VLSI devices and their systems . The discipline typically also designs passive electrical components, usually based on printed circuit boards . Electronics is a subfield within the wider electrical engineering academic subject but denotes a broad engineering field that covers subfields such as analog electronics , digital electronics , consumer electronics , embedded systems and power electronics . Electronics engineering deals with implementation of applications, principles and algorithms developed within many related fields, for example solid-state physics , radio engineering , telecommunications , control systems , signal processing , systems engineering , computer engineering , instrumentation engineering , electric power control , robotics , and many others. The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers IEEE is one of the most important and influential organizations for electronics engineers based in the US. On an international level, the International Electrotechnical Commission IEC prepares standards for electronic engineering, developed through consensus and thanks to the work of 20,000 experts from 172 countries worldwide. Contents 1 Relationship to electrical engineering 2 History 3 Electronics 4 Subfields 5 Education and training 5.1 Electromagnetics 5.2 Network analysis 5.3 Electronic devices and circuits 5.4 Signals and systems 5.5 Control systems 5.6 Communications 6 Professional practice 7 Project engineering 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Relationship to electrical engineering  edit  Electronics is a subfield within the wider electrical engineering academic subject. An academic degree with a major in electronics engineering can be acquired from some universities, while other universities use electrical engineering as the subject. The term electrical engineer is still used in the academic world to include electronic engineers. 1  However, some people consider the term electrical engineer should be reserved for those having specialized in power and heavy current or high voltage engineering, while others consider that power is just one subset of electrical engineering, as well as  electrical distribution engineering. The term  power engineering  is used as a descriptor in that industry. Again, in recent years there has been a growth of new separate-entry degree courses such as  systems engineering  and  communication systems engineering , often followed by academic departments of similar name, which are typically not considered as subfields of electronics engineering but of electrical engineering. 2  3  History  edit  Main article History of electronic engineering Electronic engineering as a profession sprang from technological improvements in the telegraph industry in the late 19th century and the radio and the telephone industries in the early 20th century. People were attracted to radio by the technical fascination it inspired, first in receiving and then in transmitting. Many who went into broadcasting in the 1920s were only amateurs in the period before World War I . 4  To a large extent, the modern discipline of electronic engineering was born out of telephone, radio, and television equipment development and the large amount of electronic systems development during World War II of radar , sonar , communication systems, and advanced munitions and weapon systems. In the interwar years, the subject was known as radio engineering and it was only in the late 1950s that the term electronic engineering started to emerge. 5  Electronics  edit  Main article Electronics In the field of electronic engineering, engineers design and test circuits that use the electromagnetic properties of electrical components such as resistors , capacitors , inductors , diodes and transistors to achieve a particular functionality. The tuner circuit , which allows the user of a radio to filter out all but a single station, is just one example of such a circuit. In designing an integrated circuit, electronics engineers first construct circuit schematics that specify the electrical components and describe the interconnections between them. When completed, VLSI engineers convert the schematics into actual layouts, which map the layers of various conductor and semiconductor materials needed to construct the circuit. The conversion from schematics to layouts can be done by software see electronic design automation  but very often requires human fine-tuning to decrease space and power consumption. Once the layout is complete, it can be sent to a fabrication plant for manufacturing. For systems of intermediate complexity, engineers may use VHDL modeling for programmable logic devices and FPGAs . Integrated circuits , FPGAs and other electrical components can then be assembled on printed circuit boards to form more complicated circuits. Today, printed circuit boards are found in most electronic devices including televisions , computers and audio players . 6  Subfields  edit  This section duplicates the scope of other sections , specifically, Electrical engineeringSubfields .  February 2019  Electronic engineering has many subfields. This section describes some of the most popular subfields in electronic engineering although there are engineers who focus exclusively on one subfield, there are also many who focus on a combination of subfields. Signal processing deals with the analysis and manipulation of signals . Signals can be either analog , in which case the signal varies continuously according to the information, or digital , in which case the signal varies according to a series of discrete values representing the information. For analog signals, signal processing may involve the amplification and filtering of audio signals for audio equipment or the modulation and demodulation of signals for telecommunications . For digital signals, signal processing may involve the compression , error checking and error detection of digital signals. Telecommunications engineering deals with the transmission of information across a channel such as a co-axial cable , optical fiber or free space . Transmissions across free space require information to be encoded in a carrier wave in order to shift the information to a carrier frequency suitable for transmission, this is known as modulation . Popular analog modulation techniques include amplitude modulation and frequency modulation . The choice of modulation affects the cost and performance of a system and these two factors must be balanced carefully by the engineer. Once the transmission characteristics of a system are determined, telecommunication engineers design the transmitters and receivers needed for such systems. These two are sometimes combined to form a two-way communication device known as a transceiver . A key consideration in the design of transmitters is their power consumption as this is closely related to their signal strength . If the signal strength of a transmitter is insufficient the signals information will be corrupted by noise . Electromagnetics is an in-depth study about the signals that are transmitted in a channel Wired or Wireless. This includes Basics of Electromagnetic waves, Transmission Lines and Waveguides , Antennas, its types and applications with Radio-Frequency RF and Microwaves. Its applications are seen widely in other sub-fields like Telecommunication, Control and Instrumentation Engineering. Control engineering has a wide range of applications from the flight and propulsion systems of commercial airplanes to the cruise control present in many modern cars . It also plays an important role in industrial automation . Control engineers often utilize feedback when designing control systems . For example, in a car with cruise control , the vehicles speed is continuously monitored and fed back to the system which adjusts the engines power output accordingly. Where there is regular feedback, control theory can be used to determine how the system responds to such feedback. Instrumentation engineering deals with the design of devices to measure physical quantities such as pressure , flow and temperature . These devices are known as instrumentation . The design of such instrumentation requires a good understanding of physics that often extends beyond electromagnetic theory . For example, radar guns use the Doppler effect to measure the speed of oncoming vehicles. Similarly, thermocouples use the PeltierSeebeck effect to measure the temperature difference between two points. Often instrumentation is not used by itself, but instead as the sensors of larger electrical systems. For example, a thermocouple might be used to help ensure a furnaces temperature remains constant. For this reason, instrumentation engineering is often viewed as the counterpart of control engineering. Computer engineering deals with the design of computers and computer systems. This may involve the design of new computer hardware , the design of PDAs or the use of computers to control an industrial plant . Development of embedded systems systems made for specific tasks e.g., mobile phonesis also included in this field. This field includes the micro controller and its applications. Computer engineers may also work on a systems software . However, the design of complex software systems is often the domain of software engineering , which is usually considered a separate discipline. VLSI design engineering VLSI stands for very large scale integration . It deals with fabrication of ICs and various electronic components. Education and training  edit  Main article Education and training of electrical and electronics engineers Electronics engineers typically possess an academic degree with a major in electronic engineering. The length of study for such a degree is usually three or four years and the completed degree may be designated as a Bachelor of Engineering , Bachelor of Science , Bachelor of Applied Science , or Bachelor of Technology depending upon the university. Many UK universities also offer Master of Engineering  MEng  degrees at the graduate level. Some electronics engineers also choose to pursue a postgraduate degree such as a Master of Science , Doctor of Philosophy in Engineering, or an Engineering Doctorate . The masters degree is being introduced in some European and American Universities as a first degree and the differentiation of an engineer with graduate and postgraduate studies is often difficult. In these cases, experience is taken into account. The masters degree may consist of either research, coursework or a mixture of the two. The Doctor of Philosophy consists of a si gnificant research component and is often viewed as the entry point to academia. In most countries, a bachelors degree in engineering represents the first step towards certification and the degree program itself is certified by a professional body. Certification allows engineers to legally sign off on plans for projects affecting public safety. 7  After completing a certified degree program, the engineer must satisfy a range of requirements, including work experience requirements, before being certified. Once certified the engineer is designated the title of Professional Engineer in the United States, Canada, and South Africa, Chartered Engineer or Incorporated Engineer in the United Kingdom, Ireland, India, and Zimbabwe, Chartered Professional Engineer in Australia and New Zealand or European Engineer in much of the European Union. A degree in electronics generally includes units covering physics , chemistry , mathematics , project management and specific topics in electrical engineering . Initially, such topics cover most, if not all, of the subfields of electronic engineering. Students then choose to specialize in one or more subfields towards the end of the degree. Fundamental to the discipline are the sciences of physics and mathematics as these help to obtain both a qualitative and quantitative description of how such systems will work. Today most engineering work involves the use of computers and it is commonplace to use computer-aided design and simulation software programs when designing electronic systems. Although most electronic engineers will understand basic circuit theory, the theories employed by engineers generally depend upon the work they do. For example, quantum mechanics and solid state physics might be relevant to an engineer working on VLSI but are largely irrelevant to engineers working with embedded systems . Apart from electromagnetics and network theory, other items in the syllabus are particular to electronics engineering course. Electrical engineering courses have other specialisms such as machines , power generation and distribution . This list does not include the extensive engineering mathematics curriculum that is a prerequisite to a degree. 8  9  Electromagnetics  edit  Elements of vector calculus  divergence and curl  Gauss and Stokes theorems , Maxwells equations  differential and integral forms. Wave equation , Poynting vector . Plane waves  propagation through various media reflection and refraction  phase and group velocity  skin depth . Transmission lines  characteristic impedance  impedance transformation Smith chart  impedance matching  pulse excitation. Waveguides  modes in rectangular waveguides boundary conditions  cut-off frequencies  dispersion relations . Antennas Dipole antennas  antenna arrays  radiation pattern reciprocity theorem, antenna gain . 10  11  Network analysis  edit  Network graphs matrices associated with graphs incidence, fundamental cut set, and fundamental circuit matrices. Solution methods nodal and mesh analysis. Network theorems superposition, Thevenin and Nortons maximum power transfer, Wye-Delta transformation. 12  Steady state sinusoidal analysis using phasors. Linear constant coefficient differential equations time domain analysis of simple RLC circuits, Solution of network equations using Laplace transform  frequency domain analysis of RLC circuits. 2-port network parameters driving point and transfer functions. State equations for networks. 13  Electronic devices and circuits  edit  Electronic devices  Energy bands in silicon, intrinsic and extrinsic silicon. Carrier transport in silicon diffusion current, drift current, mobility, resistivity. Generation and recombination of carriers. p-n junction diode, Zener diode , tunnel diode , BJT , JFET , MOS capacitor , MOSFET , LED , p-i-n and avalanche photo diode , LASERs. Device technology integrated circuit fabrication process, oxidation, diffusion, ion implantation , photolithography, n-tub, p-tub and twin-tub CMOS process. 14  15  Analog circuits  Equivalent circuits large and small-signal of diodes, BJT, JFETs, and MOSFETs. Simple diode circuits, clipping, clamping, rectifier. Biasing and bias stability of transistor and FET amplifiers. Amplifiers single-and multi-stage, differential, operational, feedback and power. Analysis of amplifiers frequency response of amplifiers. Simple op-amp circuits. Filters. Sinusoidal oscillators criterion for oscillation single-transistor and op-amp configurations. Function generators and wave-shaping circuits, Power supplies. 16  Digital circuits  Boolean functions  NOT , AND , OR , XOR ,.... Logic gates digital IC families  DTL , TTL , ECL , MOS , CMOS . Combinational circuits arithmetic circuits, code converters, multiplexers and decoders . Sequential circuits  latches and flip-flops, counters and shift-registers. Sample and hold circuits, ADCs , DACs . Semiconductor memories . Microprocessor 8086  architecture, programming, memory and IO interfacing. 17  18  Signals and systems  edit  Definitions and properties of Laplace transform , continuous-time and discrete-time Fourier series , continuous-time and discrete-time Fourier Transform , z-transform . Sampling theorems . Linear Time-Invariant LTI Systems  definitions and properties causality, stability, impulse response, convolution, poles and zeros frequency response, group delay, phase delay. Signal transmission through LTI systems. Random signals and noise probability , random variables , probability density function , autocorrelation, power spectral density , function analogy between vectors  functions. 19  20  Control systems  edit  Basic control system components block diagrammatic description, reduction of block diagrams   Masons rule . Open loop and closed loop negative unity feedback systems and stability analysis of these systems. Signal flow graphs and their use in determining transfer functions of systems transient and steady state analysis of LTI control systems and frequency response. Analysis of steady-state disturbance rejection and noise sensitivity. Tools and techniques for LTI control system analysis and design root loci, Routh-Hurwitz stability criterion , Bode and Nyquist plots . Control system compensators elements of lead and lag compensation, elements of Proportional-Integral-Derivative controller PID. Discretization of continuous time systems using zero-order hold and ADCs for digital controller implementation. Limitations of digital controllers aliasing. State variable representation and solution of state equation of LTI control systems. Linearization of Nonlinear dynamical systems with state-space realizations in both frequency and time domains. Fundamental concepts of controllability and observability for MIMO LTI systems. State space realizations observable and controllable canonical form. Ackermanns formula for state-feedback pole placement. Design of full order and reduced order estimators. 21  22  Communications  edit  Analog communication systems amplitude and angle modulation and demodulation systems, spectral analysis of these operations, superheterodyne noise conditions. Digital communication systems pulse-code modulation PCM, differential pulse-code modulation DPCM, delta modulation DM, digital modulation  amplitude, phase- and frequency-shift keying schemes  ASK , PSK , FSK , matched-filter receivers, bandwidth consideration and probability of error calculations for these schemes, GSM , TDMA . 23  24  Professional practice  edit  Professional bodies of note for electrical engineers include the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers IEEE and the Institution of Electrical Engineers IEE now renamed the Institution of Engineering and Technology or IET. Members of the Institution of Engineering and Technology MIET are recognized professionally in Europe, as Electrical and computer technology engineers. The IEEE claims to produce 30 percent of the worlds literature in electricalelectronic engineering, has over 430,000 members, and holds more than 450 IEEE sponsored or cosponsored conferences worldwide each year. SMIEEE is a recognised professional designation in the United States. Project engineering  edit  For most engineers not involved at the cutting edge of system design and development, technical work accounts for only a fraction of the work they do. A lot of time is also spent on tasks such as discussing proposals with clients, preparing budgets and determining project schedules. Many senior engineers manage a team of technicians or other engineers and for this reason, proje ct management skills are important. Most engineering projects involve some form of documentation and strong written communication skills are therefore very important. The workplaces of electronics engineers are just as varied as the types of work they do. Electronics engineers may be found in the pristine laboratory environment of a fabrication plant, the offices of a consulting firm or in a research laboratory. During their working life, electronics engineers may find themselves supervising a wide range of individuals including scientists, electricians, computer programmers and other engineers. Obsolescence of technical skills is a serious concern for electronics engineers. Membership and participation in technical societies, regular reviews of periodicals in the field and a habit of continued learning are therefore essential to maintaining proficiency. And these are mostly used in the field of consumer electronics products. 25  See also  edit  Electronics portal Electrical engineering technology Glossary of electrical and electronics engineering Index of electrical engineering articles Information engineering List of electrical engineers Timeline of electrical and electronic engineering References  edit   Allan R. Hambley Electrical Engineering , pp. 3, 441, Prentice Hall, 2004 .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em ISBN   978-0-13-147046-0  Principles of Electrical Engineering . Books.google.com . Retrieved 29 October 2012 .  Anthony J. Pansini Electrical Distribution Engineering , p. xiv, The Fairmont Press Inc., 2006 ISBN   978-0-88173-546-8  Erik Barnouw A Tower in Babel , p. 28, Oxford University Press US, 1966 ISBN   978-0-19-500474-8  Radio Engineering Principles . Books.google.com . Retrieved 29 October 2012 .  Charles A. Harper High Performance Printed Circuit Boards , pp. xiii-xiv, McGraw-Hill Professional, 2000 ISBN   978-0-07-026713-8  Are there any professional examinations available in the electronics and telecommunications engineering field Where do I get the listings of these examinations, and how do I apply for them Who is eligible to write such examinations . Retrieved 28 May 2018 .  Rakesh K. GargAshish DixitPavan Yadav Basic Electronics , p. 1, Firewall Media, 2008 ISBN   978-81-318-0302-8  Sachin S. Sharma Power Electronics , p. ix, Firewall Media, 2008 ISBN   978-81-318-0350-9  Edward J. RothwellMichael J. Cloud Electromagnetics , CRC Press, 2001 ISBN   978-0-8493-1397-4  Joseph Edminister Schaums Outlines Electromagnetics , McGraw Hill Professional, 1995 ISBN   978-0-07-021234-3  J. O. Bird Electrical Circuit Theory and Technology , pp. 372443, Newness, 2007 ISBN   978-0-7506-8139-1  Alan K. Walton Network Analysis and Practice , Cambridge University Press, 1987 ISBN   978-0-521-31903-4  David K. FerryJonathan P. Bird Electronic Materials and Devices , Academic Press, 2001 ISBN   978-0-12-254161-2  Jimmie J. Cathey Schaums Outline of Theory and Problems of Electronic Devices and Circuits , McGraw Hill, 2002 ISBN   978-0-07-136270-2  Wai-Kai Chen Analog Circuits and Devices , CRC Press, 2003 ISBN   978-0-8493-1736-1  Ronald C. Emery Digital Circuits Logic and Design , CRC Press, 1985 ISBN   978-0-8247-7397-7  Anant AgarwalJeffrey H. Lang Foundations of Analog and Digital Electronic Circuits , Morgan Kaufmann, 2005 ISBN   978-1-55860-735-4  Michael J. Roberts Signals and Systems , p. 1, McGrawHill Professional, 2003 ISBN   978-0-07-249942-1  Hwei Piao Hsu Schaums Outline of Theory and Problems of Signals and Systems , p. 1, McGrawHill Professional, 1995 ISBN   978-0-07-030641-7  Gerald Luecke, Analog and Digital Circuits for Electronic Control System Applications , Newnes, 2005. ISBN   978-0-7506-7810-0 .  Joseph J. DiStefano, Allen R. Stubberud, and Ivan J. Williams, Schaums Outline of Theory and Problems of Feedback and Control Systems , McGraw-Hill Professional , 1995. ISBN   978-0-07-017052-0 .  Shanmugam, Digital and Analog Communication Systems , Wiley-India, 2006. ISBN   978-81-265-0914-0 .  Hwei Pia Hsu, Schaums Outline of Analog and Digital Communications , McGrawHill Professional, 2003. ISBN   978-0-07-140228-6 .  Homer L. Davidson, Troubleshooting and Repairing Consumer Electronics , p. 1, McGrawHill Professional, 2004. ISBN   978-0-07-142181-2 . External links  edit  CategoryElectronics at Wikipedias sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Wikimedia Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers IEEE v t e Engineering Civil Architectural Construction Environmental Earthquake Geotechnical Hydraulic Mining Structural Transportation Mechanical Acoustical Aerospace Automotive Marine Railway Thermal Electrical Computer Control Electromechanics Electronics Microwaves Power Radio Frequency Telecommunications Chemical Biochemical Biological Molecular Petroleum Process Reaction Interdisciplinary Audio Biomedical Engineering mathematics Engineering mechanics Engineering physics Engineering science Fire Industrial Information Materials science Ceramics Metallurgy Polymer Mechatronics Military Nanotechnology Nuclear Optical Photonics Privacy Robotics Sanitary Security Software Systems Glossaries Engineering Aerospace engineering Civil engineering Electrical and electronics engineering Mechanical engineering Structural engineering List of engineering branches CategoryEngineering Engineering portal Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleElectronic_engineering oldid912791097  Categories  Electrical engineering Electronic engineering Computer engineering Engineering disciplines Hidden categories Duplicate articles Articles using small message boxes Use dmy dates from January 2018