Privacy engineering From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Privacy engineering is an emerging discipline within, at least, the software or information systems domain which aims to provide methodologies, tools, and techniques such that the engineered systems provide acceptable levels of privacy . In the US acceptable level of privacy is defined in terms of compliance to the functional and non-functional requirements set out through a privacy policy , while in the EU, the General Data Protection Regulation sets the requirements that need to be fulfilled. In the rest of the world, the requirements change depending on local implementations of privacy and data protection laws. Contents 1 Definition and scope 2 Core practices 3 Aspects of information 4 Definitions of privacy 5 Legal basis 6 See also 7 Notes and references Definition and scope  edit  The definition of privacy engineering given by National Institute of Standards and Technology NIST is 1  .mw-parser-output .templatequoteoverflowhiddenmargin1em 0padding0 40px.mw-parser-output .templatequote .templatequoteciteline-height1.5emtext-alignleftpadding-left1.6emmargin-top0 Focuses on providing guidance that can be used to decrease privacy risks, and enable organizations to make purposeful decisions about resource allocation and effective implementation of controls in information systems. While privacy has been developing as a legal domain, privacy engineering has only really come to the fore in recent years as the necessity of implementing said privacy laws in information systems has become a definite requirement to the deployment of such information systems. For example, IPEN 2  outlines their position in this respect as One reason for the lack of attention to privacy issues in development is the lack of appropriate tools and best practices. Developers have to deliver quickly in order to minimize time to market and effort, and often will re-use existing components, despite their privacy flaws. There are, unfortunately, few building blocks for privacy friendly applications and services, and secu rity can often be weak as well. Privacy engineering 3  involves aspects such as process management, security , ontology and software engineering . The actual application 4  of these derives from necessary legal compliances, privacy policies and manifestos such as Privacy-by-Design . Relationship between PbD and Privacy Engineering Towards the more implementation levels, privacy engineering employs privacy enhancing technologies to enable anonymisation and de-identification of data. Privacy engineering requires suitable security engineering practices to be deployed, and some privacy aspects can be implemented using security techniques. A privacy impact assessment is another tool within this context and its use does not imply that privacy engineering is being practiced. One area of concern is the proper definition and application of terms such as personal data, personally identifiable information, anonymisation and pseudo-anonymisation which lack sufficient and detailed enough meanings when applied to software, information systems and data sets. Another facet of information system privacy has been the ethical use of such systems with particular concern on surveillance , big data collection, artificial intelligence etc. Some members of the privacy and privacy engineering communication advocate the idea of Ethics engineering or reject the possibility of engineering privacy into systems intended for surveillance. Core practices  edit  As this particular field is still in its infancy and somewhat dominated by the legal aspects, the following list just outlines the primary areas on which privacy engineering is based Data flow modelling Semantics Requirements engineering Risk assessment Privacy management and processes 5  6  Development of suitable terminologiesontologies for expressing types, usages, purposes etc. of information Privacy impact assessment Despite the lack of a cohesive development of the above areas, courses already exist 7  8  9  for the training of privacy engineering. The International Workshop on Privacy Engineering 10  co-located with IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy 11  provides a venue to address the gap between research and practice in systematizing and evaluating approaches to capture and address privacy issues while engineering information systems. 12  Aspects of information  edit  As an area privacy engineering is particular concerned with the processing of information over the following aspects or ontologies and their relations 13  to their implementation in software Information Type Ontologies as opposed to PII or machine types Data Processing Ontologies Semantics of information and data sets see also noise and anonymisation  Provenance 14  of information, including the notion of data subject Usage of information Purpose of information, viz primary vs secondary collection Notions of controller and processor 15  The notions of authority and identity ostensibly of the sources of data Further to this how the above then affect the security classification, risk classification and thus the levels of protection and flow within a system can then the metricised or calculated. Definitions of privacy  edit  As already stated, privacy is an area dominated by legal aspects but requiring implementation using, ostensibly, engineering techniques, disciplines and skills. Privacy Engineering as an overall discipline takes its basis from considering privacy not just as a legal aspect or engineering aspect and their unification but also utilising the following areas Privacy as a philosophical aspect Privacy as an economic aspect, particular game theory Privacy as a sociological aspect Legal basis  edit  The impetus for technological progress in privacy engineering stems from general privacy laws and various particular legal acts Privacy Act of 1974 Privacy Protection Act of 1980 Video Privacy Protection Act Online Privacy Protection Act Childrens Online Privacy Protection Act Drivers Privacy Protection Act Intimate Privacy Protection Act Telephone Records and Privacy Protection Act of 2006 General Data Protection Regulation See also  edit  Data Protection Directive Information security Risk management Free and open MOOC course module on privacy management with Karlstad University s Privacy by Design on-line course . Notes and references  edit   Privacy Engineering at NIST . NIST . Retrieved 3 May 2015 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Internet Privacy Engineering Network. Background and purpose . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .  Oliver, Ian July 2014. Privacy Engineering A Dataflow and Ontological Approach 1st ed.. CreateSpace. ISBN   978-1497569713 . Retrieved 3 May 2015 .  Grses, Seda Troncoso, Carmela Diaz, Claudia 2011. Engineering Privacy by Design PDF . International Conference on Privacy and Data Protection CPDP Book . Retrieved 11 May 2015 .  Dennedy, Fox, Finneran. The Privacy Engineers Manifesto 1st ed.. APress. ISBN   978-1-4302-6355-5 . CS1 maint multiple names authors list  link   MITRE Corp. Privacy Engineering Framework . Retrieved 4 May 2015 .  MSIT-Privacy Engineering . Carnegie Mellon University.  Oliver, Ian. Introduction to Privacy and Privacy Engineering . EIT Summer School, University of Brighton . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .  Privacy Engineering . cybersecurity.berkeley.edu . University of California, Berkeley.  International Workshop on Privacy Engineering . IEEE Security.  IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy . IEEE Security.  Gurses, Del Alamo Mar 2016. Privacy Engineering Shaping an Emerging Field of Research and Practice. 14 2. IEEE Security and Privacy. Cite journal requires journal  help   Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Semantic Conceptions of Information . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .  Paul Groth, Luc Moreau. An Overview of the PROV Family of Documents . W3C . Retrieved 10 May 2015 .  Article 29 Data Protection Working Party 16 February 2010. Opinion 12010 on the concepts of controller and processor  . 0026410EN WP 169. Cite journal requires journal  help  v t e Privacy Principles Expectation of privacy Right to privacy Right to be forgotten Post-mortem privacy Privacy laws Australia Canada Denmark England European Union Germany Ghana New Zealand Singapore Switzerland United States Data protection authorities Australia Denmark European Union France Germany Ireland Isle of Man Norway Philippines Spain Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom Areas Consumer Medical Workplace Information privacy Law Financial Internet Personal data Personal identifier Privacy-enhancing technologies Social networking services Privacy engineering Secret ballot Advocacy organizations American Civil Liberties Union Center for Democracy and Technology Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility Future of Privacy Forum Electronic Privacy Information Center Electronic Frontier Foundation European Digital Rights Global Network Initiative NOYB Privacy International Privacy Rights Clearinghouse See also Anonymity Cellphone surveillance Cyberstalking Data security Global surveillance Mass surveillance Privacy engineering Human rights Identity theft Panopticon Personality rights Search warrant v t e Engineering Civil Architectural Construction Environmental Earthquake Geotechnical Hydraulic Mining Structural Transportation Mechanical Acoustical Aerospace Automotive Marine Railway Thermal Electrical Computer Control Electromechanics Electronics Microwaves Power Radio Frequency Telecommunications Chemical Biochemical Biological Molecular Petroleum Process Reaction Interdisciplinary Audio Biomedical Engineering mathematics Engineering mechanics Engineering physics Engineering science Fire Industrial Information Materials science Ceramics Metallurgy Polymer Mechatronics Military Nanotechnology Nuclear Optical Photonics Privacy Robotics Sanitary Security Software Systems Glossaries Engineering Aerospace engineering Civil engineering Electrical and electronics engineering Mechanical engineering Structural engineering List of engineering branches CategoryEngineering Engineering portal Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitlePrivacy_engineering oldid906893620  Categories  Security engineering Privacy Hidden categories CS1 maint multiple names authors list CS1 errors missing periodical CS1 long volume value