Glossary of mechanical engineering From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Most of the terms listed in Wikipedia glossaries are already defined and explained within Wikipedia itself. However, glossaries like this one are useful for looking up, comparing and reviewing large numbers of terms together. You can help enhance this page by adding new terms or writing definitions for existing ones. This glossary of mechanical engineering terms pertains specifically to mechanical engineering and its sub-disciplines. For a broad overview of engineering, see glossary of engineering . Contents    A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z See also A  edit  Abrasion  is the process of scuffing, scratching, wearing down, marring, or rubbing away. It can be intentionally imposed in a controlled process using an abrasive. Abrasion can be an undesirable effect of exposure to normal use or exposure to the elements. Accelerated life testing  is the process of testing a product by subjecting it to conditions  stress , strain , temperatures, voltage, vibration rate, pressure etc. in excess of its normal service parameters in an effort to uncover faults and potential modes of failure in a short amount of time. 1  2  By analyzing the products response to such tests, engineers can make predictions about the service life and maintenance intervals of a product. 3  4  Acceleration  In physics , acceleration is the rate of change of velocity of an object with respect to time. An objects acceleration is the net result of any and all forces acting on the object, as described by Newtons Second Law . 5  The SI unit for acceleration is metre per second squared m s 2 . Accelerations are vector quantities they have magnitude and direction  and add according to the parallelogram law . 6  7  As a vector , the calculated net force is equal to the product of the objects mass a scalar quantity and its acceleration. Accelerometer  is a device that measures proper acceleration . 8  Proper acceleration, being the acceleration or rate of change of velocity  of a body in its own instantaneous rest frame , 9  is not the same as coordinate acceleration, being the acceleration in a fixed coordinate system . Accuracy and precision  Ackermann steering geometry  is a geometric arrangement of linkages in the steering of a car or other vehicle designed to solve the problem of wheels on the inside and outside of a turn needing to trace out circles of different radii . It was invented by the German carriage builder Georg Lankensperger in Munich in 1817, then patented by his agent in England, Rudolph Ackermann 17641834 in 1818 for horse-drawn carriages. Erasmus Darwin may have a prior claim as the inventor dating from 1758. 10  Acoustic droplet ejection  ADE uses a pulse of ultrasound to move low volumes of fluids typically nanoliters or picoliters without any physical contact. This technology focuses acoustic energy into a fluid sample in order to eject droplets as small as a picoliter . ADE technology is a very gentle process. This feature makes the technology suitable for a wide variety of applications including proteomics and cell-based assays. Active cooling  An active cooling system is one that involves the use of energy to cool something, as opposed to passive cooling that uses no energy. Such systems circulate a coolant to transfer heat from one place to another. The coolant is either a gas, such as in air cooling of computers , or a liquid such as in a car engine . In the latter case, liquid is pumped to transfer heat from the engine to the radiator, which in turn is cooled by passing air over it. Other active cooling systems make use of a refrigeration cycle . Actual mechanical advantage  The actual mechanical advantage AMA is the mechanical advantage determined by physical measurement of the input and output forces. Actual mechanical advantage takes into account energy loss due to deflection, friction, and wear. Adjoint equation  is a linear differential equation , usually derived from its primal equation using integration by parts . Gradient values with respect to a particular quantity of interest can be efficiently calculated by solving the adjoint equation. Methods based on solution of adjoint equations are used in wing shape optimization , fluid flow control and uncertainty quantification . For example d X t  a  X t  d t  b  X t  d W displaystyle dX_taX_tdtbX_tdW this is an It stochastic differential equation. Now by using Euler scheme, we integrate the parts of this equation and get another equation, X n  1  X n  a  t   b  t displaystyle X_n1X_naDelta tzeta bsqrt Delta t , here  displaystyle zeta  is a random variable, later one is an adjoint equation. Aerodynamics  is the study of the motion of air , particularly its interaction with a solid object, such as an airplane wing. It is a sub-field of fluid dynamics and gas dynamics , and many aspects of aerodynamics theory are common to these fields. Agitator device  Air handler  An air handler , or air handling unit often abbreviated to AHU , is a device used to regulate and circulate air as part of a heating, ventilating, and air-conditioning  HVAC  system. 11  Air compressor  is a device that converts power using an electric motor, diesel or gasoline engine, etc. into potential energy stored in pressurized air i.e., compressed air . By one of several methods, an air compressor forces more and more air into a storage tank, increasing the pressure. When tank pressure reaches its engineered upper limit the air compressor shuts off. The compressed air, then, is held in the tank until called into use. 12  Air conditioner  Air conditioning often referred to as AC , AC , or air con  13  is the process of removing heat and moisture from the interior of an occupied space, to improve the comfort of occupants. Air conditioning can be used in both domestic and commercial environments. Air preheater  APH is any device designed to heat air before another process for example, combustion in a boiler  with the primary objective of increasing the thermal efficiency of the process. They may be used alone or to replace a recuperative heat system or to replace a steam coil. Airflow  Airflow, or air flow is the movement of air from one area to another. The primary cause of airflow is the existence of pressure gradients . Air behaves in a fluid manner, meaning particles naturally flow from areas of higher pressure to those where the pressure is lower. Atmospheric air pressure is directly related to altitude, temperature, and composition. 14  15  In engineering , airflow is a measurement of the amount of air per unit of time that flows through a particular device. Allowance  is a planned deviation between an exact dimension and a nominal or theoretical dimension, or between an intermediate-stage dimension and an intended final dimension. The unifying abstract concept is that a certain amount of difference allows for some known factor of compensation or interference. For example, an area of excess metal may be left because it is needed to complete subsequent machining. Common cases are listed below. An allowance, which is a planned deviation from an ideal, is contrasted with a tolerance , which accounts for expected but unplanned deviations. American Machinists Handbook  American Society of Mechanical Engineers  The American Society of Mechanical Engineers  ASME  is a professional association that, in its own words, promotes the art, science, and practice of multidisciplinary engineering and allied sciences around the globe via  continuing education , training and professional development , codes and standards , research , conferences and publications, government relations, and other forms of outreach. 16  Ampere  is the base unit of electric current in the International System of Units SI. 17  18  It is named after Andr-Marie Ampre 17751836, French mathematician and physicist, considered the father of electrodynamics . Applied mechanics  describes the behavior of a body, in either a beginning state of rest or of motion, subjected to the action of forces. 19  Applied mechanics, bridges the gap between physical theory and its application to technology . It is used in many fields of engineering , especially mechanical engineering and civil engineering . In this context, it is commonly referred to as Engineering Mechanics . Archimedes screw  also known by the name the Archimedean screw or screw pump , is a machine used for transferring water from a low-lying body of water into irrigation ditches. Water is pumped by turning a screw-shaped surface inside a pipe. The screw pump is commonly attributed to Archimedes , 20  Artificial intelligence   AI , sometimes called machine intelligence , is intelligence demonstrated by machines , in contrast to the natural intelligence displayed by humans and other animals. In computer science AI research is defined as the study of  intelligent agents  any device that perceives its environment and takes actions that maximize its chance of successfully achieving its goals. 21  Colloquially, the term artificial intelligence is applied when a machine mimics cognitive functions that humans associate with other human minds , such as learning and problem solving. 22  Assembly drawing  Automaton clock  An automaton clock or automata clock is a type of striking clock featuring automatons . 23  Clocks like these were built from the 1st century BC through to Victorian times in Europe . A Cuckoo clock is a simple form of this type of clock. Automobile  is a wheeled motor vehicle used for transportation . Most definitions of car say they run primarily on roads, seat one to eight people, have four tires , and mainly transport people rather than goods. 24  25  Automobile handling  Automobile handling and vehicle handling are descriptions of the way a wheeled vehicle responds and reacts to the inputs of a driver, as well as how it moves along a track or road. It is commonly judged by how a vehicle performs particularly during cornering , acceleration, and braking as well as on the vehicles directional stability when moving in steady state condition. Automotive engineering  Automotive engineering , along with aerospace engineering and marine engineering , is a branch of vehicle engineering , incorporating elements of mechanical , electrical , electronic , software and safety engineering as applied to the design, manufacture and operation of motorcycles , automobiles and trucks and their respective engineering subsystems. It also includes modification of vehicles. Manufacturing domain deals with the creation and assembling the whole parts of automobiles is also included in it.The automotive engineering field is research -intensive and involves direct application of mathematical models and formulas. The study of automotive engineering is to design, de velop, fabricate, and testing vehicles or vehicle components from the concept stage to production stage. Production, development, and manufacturing are the three major functions in this field. Axle  is a central shaft for a rotating wheel or gear. On wheeled vehicles, the axle may be fixed to the wheels, rotating with them, or fixed to the vehicle, with the wheels rotating around the axle. 26  In the former case, bearings or bushings are provided at the mounting points where the axle is supported. In the latter case, a bearing or bushing sits inside a central hole in the wheel to allow the wheel or gear to rotate around the axle. Sometimes, especially on bicycles, the latter type axle is referred to as a spindle . Contents    Top 09 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z See also References External links B  edit  Babbitt  also called Babbitt metal or bearing metal , is any of several alloys used for the bearing surface in a plain bearing . The original Babbitt alloy was invented in 1839 by Isaac Babbitt 27  in Taunton , Massachusetts , United States. Backdrive  is a component used in reverse to obtain its input from its output. This extends to many concepts and systems from thought based to practical mechanical applications. Backlash  sometimes called lash or play , is a clearance or lost motion in a mechanism caused by gaps between the parts. It can be defined as the maximum distance or angle through which any part of a mechanical system may be moved in one direction without applying appreciable force or motion to the next part in mechanical sequence, 28  p. 1-8 . Balancing machine  is a measuring tool used for balancing rotating machine parts such as rotors for electric motors , fans , turbines , disc brakes , disc drives , propellers and pumps . Ball detent  is a simple mechanical arrangement used to hold a moving part in a temporarily fixed position relative to another part. Usually the moving parts slide with respect to each other, or one part rotates within the other. Ball screw  is a mechanical linear actuator that translates rotational motion to linear motion with little friction . A threaded shaft provides a helical raceway for ball bearings which act as a precision screw. As well as being able to apply or withstand high thrust loads, they can do so with minimum internal friction. Ball spline  Ball splines Ball Spline bearings  are a special type of linear motion bearing that are used to provide nearly frictionless linear motion while allowing the member to transmit torque simultaneously. There are grooves ground along the length of the shaft thus forming splines  for the recirculating ground balls to run inside. The outer shell that houses the balls is called a nut rather than a bushing , but is not a nut in the traditional senseit is not free to rotate about the shaft, but is free to travel up and down the shaft. Beale Number  is a parameter that characterizes the performance of Stirling engines . It is often used to estimate the power output of a Stirling engine design. For engines operating with a high temperature differential, typical values for the Beale number range from  0.11  to  0.15  where a larger number indicates higher performance. Bearing  is a machine element that constrains relative motion to only the desired motion, and reduces friction between moving parts . Bearing pressure  is a particular case of contact mechanics often occurring in cases where a convex surface male cylinder or sphere contacts a concave surface female cylinder or sphere bore or hemispherical cup . Excessive contact pressure can lead to a typical bearing failure such as a plastic deformation similar to peening . This problem is also referred to as bearing resistance . 29  Bearing surface  is the area of contact between two objects. It usually is used in reference to bolted joints and bearings , but can be applied to a wide variety of engineering applications. On a screw the bearing area loosely refers to the underside of the head. 30  Strictly speaking, the bearing area refers to the area of the screw head that directly bears on the part being fastened. 31  For a cylindrical bearing it is the projected area perpendicular to the applied force. 32  On a spring the bearing area refers to the amount of area on the top or bottom surface of the spring in contact with the constraining part. 33  The ways of machine tools , such as dovetail slides, box ways, prismatic ways, and other types of machine slides are also bearing surfaces. Belt  is a loop of flexible material used to link two or more rotating shafts mechanically, most often parallel. Belts may be used as a source of motion, to transmit power efficiently or to track relative movement. Belts are looped over pulleys and may have a twist between the pulleys, and the shafts need not be parallel. Belt friction  is a term describing the friction forces between a belt and a surface, such as a belt wrapped around a bollard . When one end of the belt is being pulled only part of this force is transmitted to the other end wrapped about a surface. The friction force increases with the amount of wrap about a surface and makes it so the tension in the belt can be different at both ends of the belt. Belt friction can be modeled by the Belt friction equation . 34  Bending  In applied mechanics , bending also known as flexure  characterizes the behavior of a slender structural element subjected to an external load applied perpendicularly to a longitudinal axis of the element. Biomechatronics  is an applied interdisciplinary science that aims to integrate biology , mechanics , and electronics . It also encompasses the fields of robotics and neuroscience . Biomechatronic devices encompass a wide range of applications from the development of prosthetic limbs to engineering solutions concerning respiration, vision, and the cardiovascular system. 35  Body in white - or BIW refers to the stage in automobile manufacturing in which a car bodys components have been joined together, using one or a combination of different techniques welding spot, MIGMAG, riveting, clinching, bonding, laser brazing etc. BIW is termed before painting  before the engine, chassis sub-assemblies, or trim glass, door lockshandles, seats, upholstery, electronics, etc. have been assembled in the frame structure. Bogie  is a chassis or framework that carries a wheelset , attached to a vehiclea modular subassembly of wheels and axles . Bogies take various forms in various modes of transport. Bonded seal  is a type of washer used to provide a seal around a screw or bolt. Originally made by Dowty Group , they are also known as Dowty seals or Dowty washers. 36  Now widely manufactured, they are available in a range of standard sizes and materials 37  38  39  Brittleness  A material is brittle if, when subjected to stress , it breaks without significant plastic deformation . Brittle materials absorb relatively little energy prior to fracture, even those of high strength . Buckling  is instability that leads to a failure mode . When a structure is subjected to compressive stress , buckling may occur. Buckling is characterized by a sudden sideways deflection of a structural member. This may occur even though the stresses that develop in the structure are well below those needed to cause failure of the material of which the structure is composed. Bus - A bus archaically also omnibus , 40  multibus , motorbus , autobus  is a road vehicle designed to carry many passengers . Bushing  or rubber bushing is a type of vibration isolator . It provides an interface between two parts, damping the energy transmitted through the bushing. A common application is in vehicle suspension systems, where a bushing made of rubber or, more often, synthetic rubber or polyurethane  separates the faces of two metal objects while allowing a certain amount of movement. This movement allows the suspension parts to move freely, for example, when traveling over a large bump, while minimizing transmission of noise and small vibrations through to the chassis of the vehicle. A rubber bushing may also be described as a flexible mounting or antivibration mounting . Boiler - is a closed vessel in which fluid generally water is heated. The fluid does not necessarily boil . The heated or vaporized fluid exits the boiler for use in various processes or heating applications, 41  42  including water heating , central heating , boiler-based power generation , cooking , and sanitation . Contents    Top 09 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z See also References External links C  edit  CAD  see Computer-aided design. CAM  see Computer-aided manufacturing CAID  see Computer-aided industrial design. Calculator  An electronic calculator is typically a portable electronic device used to perform calculations , ranging from basic arithmetic to complex mathematics . Calculus  is the mathematical study of continuous change. Car handling  Automobile handling and vehicle handling are descriptions of the way a wheeled vehicle responds and reacts to the inputs of a driver, as well as how it moves along a track or road. It is commonly judged by how a vehicle performs particularly during cornering , acceleration, and braking as well as on the vehicles directional stability when moving in steady state condition. Carbon fiber reinforced polymer  or carbon fiber reinforced plastic , or carbon fiber reinforced thermoplastic  CFRP , CRP , CFRTP , or often simply carbon fiber , carbon composite , or even carbon , is an extremely strong and light fiber-reinforced plastic which contains carbon fibers . Carbon fibers  or carbon fibres alternatively CF, graphite fiber or graphite fibre are fibers about 510 micrometres in diameter and composed mostly of carbon atoms. Carbon fibers have several advantages including high stiffness, high tensile strength, low weight, high chemical resistance, high temperature tolerance and low thermal expansion. These properties have made carbon fiber very popular in aerospace, civil engineering, military, and motorsports, along with other competition sports. However, they are relatively expensive when compared with similar fibers, such as glass fibers or plastic fibers. Classical mechanics  describes the motion of macroscopic objects, from projectiles to parts of machinery , and astronomical objects , such as spacecraft , planets , stars and galaxies . Clean room design  is the method of copying a design by reverse engineering and then recreating it without infringing any of the copyrights associated with the original design. Clean-room design is useful as a defense against copyright infringement because it relies on independent invention. However, because independent invention is not a defense against patents , clean-room designs typically cannot be used to circumvent patent restrictions. Clock  is an instrument used to measure, keep, and indicate time . The clock is one of the oldest human inventions , meeting the need to measure intervals of time shorter than the natural units the day , the lunar month , and the year . Devices operating on several physical processes have been used over the millennia. Clutch  is a mechanical device which engages and disengages power transmission especially from driving shaft to driven shaft. CNC   CNC , is the automated control of machining tools drills, boring tools, lathes by means of a computer . An NC machine alters a blank piece of material metal, plastic, wood, ceramic, or composite to meet precise specifications by following programmed instructions and without a manual operator. Coefficient of thermal expansion  describes how the size of an object changes with a change in temperature. Specifically, it measures the fractional change in size per degree change in temperature at a constant pressure. Several types of coefficients have been developed volumetric, area, and linear. The choice of coefficient depends on the particular application and which dimensions are considered important . Coil spring  also known as a helical spring , is a mechanical device which is typically used to store energy and subsequently release it, to absorb shock, or to maintain a force between contacting surfaces. They are made of an elastic material formed into the shape of a helix which returns to its natural length when unloaded. Combustion  Composite material  also called a composition material , or shortened to composite , is a material made from two or more constituent materials with significantly different physical or chemical properties that, when combined, produce a material with characteristics different from the individual components. The individual components remain separate and distinct within the finished structure, differentiating composites from mixtures and solid solutions . 43  Compression ratio  The static compression ratio , symbol  displaystyle varepsilon  , 44  of an internal combustion engine or external combustion engine is a value that represents the ratio of the volume of its combustion chamber from its largest capacity to its smallest capacity. It is a fundamental specification for many common combustion engines. Compressive strength  or compression strength is the capacity of a material or structure to withstand loads tending to reduce size, as opposed to tensile strength , which withstands loads tending to elongate. In other words, compressive strength resists compression being pushed together, whereas tensile strength resists tension being pulled apart. In the study of strength of materials , tensile strength, compressive strength, and shear strength can be analyzed independently. Computational fluid dynamics   CFD  is a branch of fluid mechanics that uses numerical analysis and data structures to analyze and solve problems that involve fluid flows . Computers are used to perform the calculations required to simulate the free-stream flow of the fluid, and the interaction of the fluid  liquids and gases  with surfaces defined by boundary conditions . With high-speed supercomputers , better solutions can be achieved, and are often required to solve the largest and most complex problems. Computer  is a device that can be instructed to carry out sequences of arithmetic or logical operations automatically via computer programming . Modern computers have the ability to follow generalized sets of operations, called programs . These programs enable computers to perform an extremely wide range of tasks. A complete computer including the hardware , the operating system main software , and peripheral equipment required and used for full operation can be referred to as a computer system . This term may as well be used for a group of computers that are connected and work together, in particular a computer network or computer cluster . Computer-aided design   CAD  is the use of computer systems or workstations  to aid in the creation, modification, analysis, or optimization of a design . 45  CAD software is used to increase the productivity of the designer, improve the quality of design, improve communications through documentation, and to create a database for manufacturing. 46  CAD output is often in the form of electronic files for print, machining, or other manufacturing operations. The term CADD for Computer Aided Design and Drafting  is also used. 47  Computer-aided industrial design   CAID  is a subset of computer-aided design CAD software that can assist in creating the look-and-feel, or industrial design aspects of a product in development. Computer-aided manufacturing -  CAM  is the use of software to control machine tools and related ones in the manufacturing of workpieces. 48  49  50  51  52  This is not the only definition for CAM, but it is the most common 48  CAM may also refer to the use of a computer to assist in all operations of a manufacturing plant, including planning, management, transportation and storage. 53  54  Computer numerical control  Numerical control  NC , also computer numerical control  CNC , is the automated control of machining tools drills, boring tools, lathes and 3D printers by means of a computer . An NC machine alters a blank piece of material metal, plastic, wood, ceramic, or composite to meet precise specifications by following programmed instructions and without a manual operator. Conservation of mass  The law of conservation of mass or principle of mass conservation states that for any system closed to all transfers of matter and energy , the mass of the system must remain constant over time, as systems mass cannot change, so quantity can neither be added nor be removed. Hence, the quantity of mass is conserved over time. Constant-velocity joint  also known as homokinetic or CV joints , allow a drive shaft to transmit power through a variable angle, at constant rotational speed, without an appreciable increase in friction or play . They are mainly used in front wheel drive vehicles. Modern rear wheel drive cars with independent rear suspension typically use CV joints at the ends of the rear axle halfshafts and increasingly use them on the drive shafts . Constraint  Continuum mechanics  is a branch of mechanics that deals with the mechanical behavior of materials modeled as a continuous mass rather than as discrete particles. Control theory  in control systems engineering is a subfield of mathematics that deals with the control of continuously operating dynamical systems in engineered processes and machines. The objective is to develop a control model for controlling such systems using a control action in an optimum manner without delay or overshoot and ensuring control stability . Corrosion  is a natural process that converts a refined metal to a more chemically-stable form, such as its oxide , hydroxide , or sulfide . It is the gradual destruction of materials usually metals  by chemical andor electrochemical reaction with their environment. Corrosion engineering is the field dedicated to controlling and stopping corrosion. Cotter pin  Crankshaft  is a mechanical part able to perform a conversion between reciprocating motion and rotational motion . In a reciprocating engine , it translates reciprocating motion of the piston into rotational motion whereas in a reciprocating compressor , it converts the rotational motion into reciprocating motion. In order to do the conversion between two motions, the crankshaft has crank throws or  crankpins , additional bearing surfaces whose axis is offset from that of the crank, to which the big ends of the connecting rods from each cylinder attach. Cybernetics  Contents    Top 09 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z See also References External links D  edit  Damping  is an influence within or upon an oscillatory system that has the effect of reducing, restricting or preventing its oscillations. In physical systems, damping is produced by processes that dissipate the energy stored in the oscillation. 55  Examples include viscous drag in mechanical systems, resistance in electronic oscillators , and absorption and scattering of light in optical oscillators . Deformation engineering  Delamination  is a mode of failure where a material fractures into layers. A variety of materials including laminate composites 56  and concrete can fail by delamination. Design  Design for manufacturability  Diesel Engine  Differential  Dimensionless number  Diode  Diode laser  Docking sleeve  Drafting  Drifting  Driveshaft  Dynamics  Dynamometer  E  edit  Elasticity  In physics , elasticity is the ability of a body to resist a distorting influence and to return to its original size and shape when that influence or force is removed. Solid objects will deform when adequate forces are applied to them. If the material is elastic, the object will return to its initial shape and size when these forces are removed. Hookes law states that the force should be proportional to the extension. The physical reasons for elastic behavior can be quite different for different materials. In metals, the atomic lattice changes size and shape when forces are applied  energy is added to the system. When forces are removed, the lattice goes back to the original lower energy state. For rubbers and other polymers, elasticity is caused by the stretching of polymer chains when forces are applied. Electric motor  Electrical engineering  Electrical circuit  Electrical network  Electromagnetism  Electronic circuit  Electronics  Energy  Engine  Engineering  Engineering cybernetics  Engineering drawing  Engineering economics  Engineering ethics  Engineering management  Engineering society  Exploratory engineering  Contents    Top 09 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z See also References External links F  edit  Fits and tolerances - Factor of safety  False precision  Fast fracture  Fatigue  Fillet  Finite element analysis  Fluid mechanics  Flywheel  Force  Force density  Forging  Four-bar linkage  Four-stroke cycle  Four wheel drive  Friction  Front wheel drive  Fundamentals of Engineering exam  Fusible plug  Fusion Deposition Modelling  G  edit  Gas compressor  Gauge  Gear  Gear coupling  Gear ratio  Granular material  H  edit  Heat engine  is a system that converts heat or thermal energy and chemical energy to mechanical energy , which can then be used to do mechanical work . 57  58  Heat transfer  Heating and cooling systems  Hinge  Hoberman mechanism  Hobsons joint  Hookes law  Hotchkiss drive  HVAC  Hydraulics  Hydrostatics  Contents    Top 09 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z See also References External links I  edit  Ideal machine  Ideal mechanical advantage  Imperial College London  Inclined plane   Independent suspension   Inductor   Industrial engineering   Inertia  Institution of Mechanical Engineers  Instrumentation  Integrated circuit  Intelligent pump  Invention  J  edit  Jack chain  Jacking gear  JIC fitting  Joule  K  edit  Kelvin  Kinematic determinacy  Kinematics  L  edit  Laser  Leaf spring  Lever  Liability  Life cycle cost analysis  Limit state design  Linkage  Live axle  Load transfer  Locomotive  Lubrication  Contents    Top 09 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z See also References External links M  edit  Machine  Machine learning  Magnetic circuit  Margin of safety  Mass transfer  Materials  Materials engineering  Material selection  Mechanical advantage  Mechanical Biological Treatment  Mechanical efficiency  Mechanical engineering  Mechanical equilibrium  Mechanical work  Mechanics  Mechanochemistry  Mechanosynthesis  Mechatronics  Microelectromechanical systems  Micromachinery  Microprocessor  Microtechnology  Modulus of rigidity -- Molecular assembler  Molecular nanotechnology  Moment  Moment of inertia  Motorcycle  Multi-link suspension  N  edit  Nanotechnology  Normal stress  Nozzle  O  edit  Orientation Overdrive  Oversteer  P  edit  Pascal unit  Physics  Pinion  Piston  Pitch drop experiment  Plain bearing  Plasma processing  Plasticity  Pneumatics  Poissons ratio  Position vector  Potential difference  Power  Power stroke  Pressure  Prime mover  Process control  Product Lifecycle Management  Professional Engineer  Project management  Pulley  Pump  Contents    Top 09 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z See also References External links Q  edit  Quality  Quality control  Quality assurance  R  edit  Rack and pinion  Rack railway  Railcar  Rail gauge  Railroad car  Railroad switch  Rail tracks  Random vibration  Reaction kinetics  Rear wheel drive  Refrigeration  Reliability engineering  Relief valve  RepRap Project  Resistive force  Resistor  Reverse engineering  Rheology  Rigid body  Robotics  Roller chain  Rolling  Rotordynamics  Contents    Top 09 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z See also References External links S  edit  Safety engineering  Screw theory  Seal  Semiconductor  Series and parallel circuits  Shear force diagrams  Shear pin  Shear strength  Shear stress  Simple machine  Simulation  Slide rule  Society of Automotive Engineers  Solid mechanics  Solid modeling  Split nut  Sprung mass  Statics  Steering  Steam Systems  Stress-strain curve  Structural failure  Student Design Competition  Surveying  Suspension  Switch  Contents    Top 09 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z See also References External links T  edit  Technical drawing  Technology  Tensile strength  Tensile stress  Testing Adjusting Balancing  Theory of elasticity  Thermodynamics  Toe  Torque  Torsion beam suspension  Torsion spring  Toughness  Track gauge  Transmission  Truck  Truck railway  Turbine  Tribology  Touch screen  tear  Tire manufacturing  Contents    Top 09 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z See also References External links U  edit  Understeer  Unibody  Unsprung weight  V  edit  Verification and Validation  Valve  Vector  Vertical strength  Viscosity  Volt  Vibration  Velocity diagrams  W  edit  Wear  Wedge  Weight transfer  Wheel  Wheel and axle  Wheelset  X  edit  X bar charts Y  edit  Yield strength  Youngs modulus  Z  edit  Zero Defects  Zeroth Law of Thermodynamics  Contents    Top 09 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z See also References External links See also  edit  Mechanical engineering Engineering Glossary of engineering National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying Fundamentals of Engineering Examination Principles and Practice of Engineering Examination Graduate Aptitude Test in Engineering Glossary of aerospace engineering Glossary of civil engineering Glossary of electrical and electronics engineering Glossary of structural engineering Glossary of areas of mathematics Glossary of artificial intelligence Glossary of astronomy Glossary of automotive design Glossary of biology Glossary of calculus Glossary of chemistry Glossary of economics Glossary of physics Glossary of probability and statistics References  edit   Nelson, W. 1980. Accelerated Life Testing - Step-Stress Models and Data Analyses. IEEE Transactions on Reliability 2 103. doi  10.1109TR.1980.5220742 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Spencer, F. W. 1991. Statistical Methods in Accelerated Life Testing. Technometrics . 33 3 360362. doi  10.108000401706.1991.10484846 .  Donahoe, D. Zhao, K. Murray, S. Ray, R. M. 2008. Accelerated Life Testing. Encyclopedia of Quantitative Risk Analysis and Assessment . doi  10.10029780470061596.risk0452 . ISBN   9780470035498 .  Elsayed, E. A. 2003. Accelerated Life Testing. Handbook of Reliability Engineering . pp.  415428. doi  10.10071-85233-841-5_22 . ISBN   1-85233-453-3 .  Crew, Henry 2008. The Principles of Mechanics . BiblioBazaar, LLC. p.  43. ISBN   978-0-559-36871-4 .  Bondi, Hermann 1980. Relativity and Common Sense . Courier Dover Publications. p.  3. ISBN   978-0-486-24021-3 .  Lehrman, Robert L. 1998. Physics the Easy Way . Barrons Educational Series. p.  27. ISBN   978-0-7641-0236-3 .  Tinder, Richard F. 2007. Relativistic Flight Mechanics and Space Travel A Primer for Students, Engineers and Scientists . Morgan  Claypool Publishers. p.  33. ISBN   978-1-59829-130-8 . Extract of page 33  Rindler, W. 2013. Essential Relativity Special, General, and Cosmological illustrated ed.. Springer. p.  61. ISBN   978-1-4757-1135-6 . Extract of page 61  Erasmus Darwins Improved Design for Steering Carriages by Desmond King-Hele , 2002, The Royal Society, London. Accessed April 2008.  2008 ASHRAE handbook   heating, ventilating, and air-conditioning systems and equipment Inch-Pound ed.. Atlanta, Ga. ASHRAE American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers. 2008. ISBN   9781933742335 .  How Do Air Compressors Work . Popular Mechanics . 2015-03-18 . Retrieved 2017-01-12 .  air con Definition in the Cambridge English Dictionary . dictionary.cambridge.org . Retrieved 1 March 2018 .  How Do Air Pressure Differences Cause Winds . ThoughtCo . Retrieved 2017-11-09 .  ASHRAE, ed. ASHRAE Handbook of Fundamentals 2017 . Atlanta, GA American Society of Heating, Air-Conditioning and Refrigeration Engineers, 2017.  ASME. ASME.org  About ASME . Retrieved 2011-12-27 .  2.1. Unit of electric current ampere , SI brochure 8th ed., BIPM, archived from the original on 3 February 2012 , retrieved 19 November 2011 Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Base unit definitions Ampere Archived 25 April 2017 at the Wayback Machine Physics.nist.gov. Retrieved on 2010-09-28.  Engineering Mechanics statics and dynamics - Dr.N.Kottiswaran ISBN   978-81-908993-3-8  Oleson 2000 , pp.  242251  Definition of AI as the study of intelligent agents  Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998 , p. 1 , which provides the version that is used in this article. Note that they use the term computational intelligence as a synonym for artificial intelligence. Russell  Norvig 2003 who prefer the term rational agent and write The whole-agent view is now widely accepted in the field  Russell  Norvig 2003 , p.  55. Nilsson 1998 Legg  Hutter 2007 .  Russell  Norvig 2009 , p.  2.  Musical automaton clock . Victoria and Albert Museum, London . Retrieved 2011-09-16 .  Fowler, H.W. Fowler, F.G., eds. 1976. Pocket Oxford Dictionary . Oxford University Press. ISBN   978-0198611134 .  motor car, n. OED Online . Oxford University Press. September 2014 . Retrieved 2014-09-29 .  Mechanical Engineering design 9th ed.. McGraw Hill. 2010. p.  360. ISBN   978-0073529288 .  Hellemans, Alexander Bunch, Bryan 1988. The Timetables of Science . Simon  Schuster . p.  305. ISBN   0671621300 .  Bagad, V.S. 2009. Mechatronics 4th revised ed.. Pune Technical Publications. ISBN   9788184314908 . Retrieved 28 June 2014 .  EN 1993-1-82005 Eurocode 3  Design of steel structures - Part 1-8 Design of joints  Smith 1990 , p.  38.  Fastener terms , retrieved 2009-06-29 .  Low  Bevis 1908 , p.  115.  Helical Compression Spring Terminology , retrieved 2009-06-29 .  Attaway, Stephen W. 1999. The Mechanics of Friction in Rope Rescue PDF . International Technical Rescue Symposium . Retrieved February 1, 2010 .  Brooker, Graham 2012. Introduction to Biomechatronics . University of Sydney, Australia. ISBN   978-1-891121-27-2 .  The Dowty Bonded Seal PDF . Retrieved 12 August 2016 .  Bonded Seals from Ashton Seals . Retrieved 12 August 2016 .  Bonded Seals from Eastern Seals . Retrieved 12 August 2016 .  Bonded Seals from Supaseal PDF . Retrieved 12 August 2016 .  Chisholm, Hugh, ed. 1911. Omnibus   . Encyclopdia Britannica . 20 11th ed.. Cambridge University Press. p.  104.  Frederick M. Steingress 2001. Low Pressure Boilers 4th ed.. American Technical Publishers. ISBN   0-8269-4417-5 .  Frederick M. Steingress, Harold J. Frost and Darryl R. Walker 2003. High Pressure Boilers 3rd ed.. American Technical Publishers. ISBN   0-8269-4300-4 .  Fazeli, M. Florez, J. Simo, R. 9 November 2018. Improvement in adhesion of cellulose fibers to the thermoplastic starch matrix by plasma treatment modification. Composites Part B Engineering . 163  207216. doi  10.1016j.compositesb.2018.11.048 .  Lutjen, D Mller, M 1984. Kfz-Rechnen . B.G. Teubner Stuttgart. p.  12. ISBN   9783519067214 .  Narayan, K. Lalit 2008. Computer Aided Design and Manufacturing . New Delhi Prentice Hall of India. p.  3. ISBN   978-8120333420 .  Narayan, K. Lalit 2008. Computer Aided Design and Manufacturing . New Delhi Prentice Hall of India. p.  4. ISBN   978-8120333420 .  Duggal, Vijay 2000. Cadd Primer A General Guide to Computer Aided Design and Drafting-Cadd, CAD . Mailmax Pub. ISBN   978-0962916595 .  a b U.S. Congress , Office of Technology Assessment 1984. Computerized manufacturing automation . DIANE Publishing. p.  48. ISBN   978-1-4289-2364-5 .  Hosking, Dian Marie Anderson, Neil 1992, Organizational change and innovation , Taylor  Francis, p.  240, ISBN   978-0-415-06314-2  Daintith, John 2004. A dictionary of computing 5 ed.. Oxford University Press. p.  102. ISBN   978-0-19-860877-6 .  Kreith, Frank 1998. The CRC handbook of mechanical engineering . CRC Press. p.  15-1. ISBN   978-0-8493-9418-8 .  Matthews, Clifford 2005. Aeronautical engineers data book 2nd ed.. Butterworth-Heinemann. p.  229. ISBN   978-0-7506-5125-7 .  Pichler, Franz Moreno-Daz, Roberto 1992. Computer aided systems theory . Springer. p.  602. ISBN   978-3-540-55354-0 .  Boothroyd, Geoffrey Knight, Winston Anthony 2006. Fundamentals of machining and machine tools 3rd ed.. CRC Press. p.  401. ISBN   978-1-57444-659-3 .  Steidel 1971. An Introduction to Mechanical Vibrations . John Wiley  Sons. p.  37. damped , which is the term used in the study of vibration to denote a dissipation of energy  Cantwell, W.J. Morton, J. 1991. The impact resistance of composite materials  a review. Composites . 22 5 347362. doi  10.10160010-43619190549-V .  Fundamentals of Classical Thermodynamics , 3rd ed. p. 159, 1985 by G. J. Van Wylen and R. E. Sonntag A heat engine may be defined as a device that operates in a thermodynamic cycle and does a certain amount of net positive work as a result of heat transfer from a high- temperature body and to a low-temperature body. Often the term heat engine is used in a broader sense to include all devices that produce work, either through heat transfer or combustion, even though the device does not operate in a thermodynamic cycle. The internal-combustion engine and the gas turbine are examples of such devices, and calling these heat engines is an acceptable use of the term.  Mechanical efficiency of heat engines , p. 1 2007 by James R. Senf Heat engines are made to provide mechanical energy from thermal energy. See also  edit  v t e Engineering Civil Architectural Construction Environmental Earthquake Geotechnical Hydraulic Mining Structural Transportation Mechanical Acoustical Aerospace Automotive Marine Railway Thermal Electrical Computer Control Electromechanics Electronics Microwaves Power Radio Frequency Telecommunications Chemical Biochemical Biological Molecular Petroleum Process Reaction Interdisciplinary Audio Biomedical Engineering mathematics Engineering mechanics Engineering physics Engineering science Fire Industrial Information Materials science Ceramics Metallurgy Polymer Mechatronics Military Nanotechnology Nuclear Optical Photonics Privacy Robotics Sanitary Security Software Systems Glossaries Engineering Aerospace engineering Civil engineering Electrical and electronics engineering Mechanical engineering Structural engineering List of engineering branches CategoryEngineering Engineering portal v t e Glossaries of science and engineering Aerospace engineering Archaeology Architecture Artificial intelligence Astronomy Biology Botany Calculus Chemistry Civil engineering Clinical research Computer science Ecology Economics Electrical and electronics engineering Engineering Entomology Environmental science Genetics Geography Geology Machine vision Mathematics Mechanical engineering Medicine Meteorology Physics Probability and statistics Psychiatry Robotics Speciation Structural engineering Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleGlossary_of_mechanical_engineering oldid914033138  Categories  Mechanical engineering Indexes of engineering topics Glossaries of science Wikipedia glossaries Hidden categories CS1 errors deprecated parameters Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference