Data management From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia    Redirected from Data Management  Jump to navigation Jump to search The data lifecycle Data Management comprises all disciplines related to managing data as a valuable resource. Contents 1 Concept 2 Topics 3 Usage 4 Integrated data management 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Concept  edit  The concept of data management arose in the 1980s as technology moved from sequential processing first punched cards , then magnetic tape  to random access storage. Since it was now possible to store a discrete fact and quickly access it using random access disk technology, those suggesting that data management was more important than business process management used arguments such as a customers home address is stored in 75 or some other large number places in our computer systems. However, during this period, random access processing was not competitively fast, so those suggesting process management was more important than data management used batch processing time as their primary argument. As application software evolved into real-time, interactive usage, it became obvious that both management processes were important. If the data was not well defined, the data would be mis-used in applications. If the process wasnt well defined, it was impossible to meet user needs. Topics  edit  Topics in data management include Data Governance Data asset Data governance Data steward Data Ethics Data Architecture Data architecture Data flows Data modeling and Design Database  Storage Management Data maintenance Database administration Database management system Business continuity planning Data Security Data access Data erasure Data privacy Data security Reference and Master Data Data integration Master data management Reference data Data Integration and Inter-operability Data movement  Extract, transform, load  Data Interoperability Documents and Content Document management system Records management Data Warehousing and Business Intelligence Business intelligence Data analysis and Data mining Data warehouse and Data mart Metadata Metadata management Metadata Metadata discovery Metadata publishing Metadata registry Data Quality Data cleansing Data integrity Data enrichment Data quality Data quality assurance Usage  edit  In modern management usage , the term data is increasingly replaced by information or even knowledge in a non-technical context. Thus data management has become information management or knowledge management . This trend obscures the raw data processing and renders interpretation implicit. The distinction between data and derived value is illustrated by the information ladder .  citation needed  However, data has staged a comeback with the popularisation of the term Big data , which refers to the collection and analyses of massive sets of data. Several organisations have established data management centers DMC 1  for their operations. Integrated data management  edit  Integrated data management IDM is a tools approach to facilitate data management and improve performance. IDM consists of an integrated, modular environment to manage enterprise application data, and optimize data-driven applications over its lifetime . 2  3  4  5  IDMs purpose is to Produce enterprise-ready applications faster Improve data access, speed iterative testing Empower collaboration between architects, developers and DBAs Consistently achieve service level targets Automate and simplify operations Provide contextual intelligence across the solution stack Support business growth Accommodate new initiatives without expanding infrastructure Simplify application upgrades, consolidation and retirement Facilitate alignment, consistency and governance Define business policies and standards up front share, extend, and apply throughout the lifecycle See also  edit  Open data Pseudonymization Information architecture Enterprise architecture Information design Information system Controlled vocabulary Data curation Data retention Data management plan Computer data storage Data proliferation Digital preservation Document management Enterprise content management Hierarchical storage management Information repository Machine-Readable Documents Performance report System integration Customer data integration Identity management Identity theft Data theft ERP software CRM software References  edit   For example Kumar, Sangeeth Ramesh, Maneesha Vinodini 2010. Lightweight Management framework LMF for a Heterogeneous Wireless Network for Landslide Detection. In Meghanathan, Natarajan Boumerdassi, Selma Chaki, Nabendu Nagamalai, Dhinaharan eds.. Recent Trends in Networks and Communications International Conferences, NeCoM 2010, WiMoN 2010, WeST 2010,Chennai, India, July 23-25, 2010. Proceedings . Communications in Computer and Information Science. 90 . Springer. p.  466. ISBN   9783642144936 . Retrieved 2016-06-16 . 4.4 Data Management Center DMC The Data Management Center is the data center for all of the deployed cluster networks. Through the DMC, the LMF allows the user to list the services in any cluster member belonging to any cluster .... .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Integrated Data Management Managing data across its lifecycle by Holly Hayes  Organizations thrive on Data by Eric Naiburg  Fragmented Management Across The Data Life Cycle Increases Cost And Risk  permanent dead link  - A commissioned study conducted by Forrester Consulting on behalf of IBM October 2008  integrated IBM Data Management information center External links  edit  Media related to Data management at Wikimedia Commons Data management at Curlie Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleData_management oldid913527707  Categories  Data management Information technology management Hidden categories All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2019 Articles with permanently dead external links All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2016 Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with Curlie links