Polyester From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search For the 1981 motion picture, see Polyester film . This article needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources   Polyester     news    newspapers    books    scholar    JSTOR  March 2012   Learn how and when to remove this template message  SEM picture of a bend in a high-surface area polyester fiber with a seven-lobed cross section Close-up of a polyester shirt Stretching polyester fabric Polyester is a category of polymers that contain the ester functional group in their main chain. As a specific material , it most commonly refers to a type called polyethylene terephthalate PET. Polyesters include naturally occurring chemicals, such as in the cutin of plant cuticles , as well as synthetics such as polybutyrate . Natural polyesters and a few synthetic ones are biodegradable , but most synthetic polyesters are not. The material is used extensively in clothing. Polyester fibers are sometimes spun together with natural fibers to produce a cloth with blended properties. Cotton -polyester blends polycot can be strong, wrinkle- and tear-resistant, and reduce shrinking. Synthetic fibers using polyester have high water, wind and environmental resistance compared to plant-derived fibers. They are less fire-resistant and can melt when ignited. 1  Polyester blends have been renamed so as to suggest their similarity or even superiority to natural fibers for example, China silk, which is an essentially deceptive term in the textiles industry for a 100 polyester fiber woven to resemble the sheen and durability of insect-derived silk . Liquid crystalline polyesters are among the first industrially used liquid crystal polymers . They are used for their mechanical properties and heat-resistance. These traits are also important in their application as an abradable seal in jet engines. 2  Natural polyesters could have played a significant role in the origins of life . Long heterogeneous polyester chains and membraneless structures are known to easily form in a one-pot reaction without catalyst under simple prebiotic conditions. 3  4  Contents 1 Types 2 Uses and applications 3 Industry 3.1 Basics 3.2 Raw material producer 3.3 Polyester processing 4 Synthesis 4.1 Azeotrope esterification 4.2 Alcoholic transesterification 4.3 Acylation HCl method 4.4 Acetate method esterification 4.5 Ring-opening polymerization 5 History 6 Biodegradation 6.1 Cross-linking 7 Environmental concerns 7.1 Pollution of freshwater and seawater habitats 7.2 Non-renewable 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Types  edit  Depending on the chemical structure, polyester can be a thermoplastic or thermoset . There are also polyester resins cured by hardeners however, the most common polyesters are thermoplastics. 5  Examples of thermoset polyesters include some of the Desmophen brand from Bayer. The OH group is reacted with an Isocyanate functional compound in a 2 component system producing coatings which may optionally be pigmented. Polyesters as thermoplastics may change shape after the application of heat. While combustible at high temperatures, polyesters tend to shrink away from flames and self-extinguish upon ignition. Polyester fibers have high tenacity and E-modulus as well as low water absorption and minimal shrinkage in comparison with other industrial fibers. Unsaturated polyesters UPR are thermosetting resins . They are used in the liquid state as casting materials, in sheet molding compounds , as fiberglass laminating resins and in non-metallic auto-body fillers. They are also used as the thermoset polymer matrix in pre-pregs . Fiberglass-reinforced unsaturated polyesters find wide application in bodies of yachts and as body parts of cars. According to the composition of their main chain, polyesters can be Main chain composition Type Examples of Polyesters Manufacturing methods Aliphatic Homopolymer Polyglycolide or polyglycolic acid PGA Polycondensation of glycolic acid Polylactic acid PLA Ring-opening polymerization of lactide Polycaprolactone PCL Ring-opening polymerization of caprolactone Polyhydroxyalkanoate PHA Polyhydroxybutyrate PHB Copolymer Polyethylene adipate PEA Polybutylene succinate PBS Polycondensation of succinic acid with 1,4-butanediol Poly3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvalerate PHBV Copolymerization of 3-hydroxybutanoic acid and 3-hydroxypentanoic acid , butyrolactone , and valerolactone oligomeric aluminoxane as a catalyst Semi-aromatic Copolymer Polyethylene terephthalate PET Polycondensation of terephthalic acid with ethylene glycol Polybutylene terephthalate PBT Polycondensation of terephthalic acid with 1,4-butanediol Polytrimethylene terephthalate PTT Polycondensation of terephthalic acid with 1,3-propanediol Polyethylene naphthalate PEN Polycondensation of at least one naphthalene dicarboxylic acid with ethylene glycol Aromatic Copolymer Vectran Polycondensation of 4-hydroxybenzoic acid and 6-hydroxynaphthalene-2-carboxylic acid Increasing the aromatic parts of polyesters increases their glass transition temperature , melting temperature, thermal stability , chemical stability... Polyesters can also be telechelic oligomers like the polycaprolactone diol PCL and the polyethylene adipate diol PEA. They are then used as prepolymers . Uses and applications  edit  Fabrics woven or knitted from polyester thread or yarn are used extensively in apparel and home furnishings, from shirts and pants to jackets and hats, bed sheets, blankets, upholstered furniture and computer mouse mats. Industrial polyester fibers, yarns and ropes are used in car tire reinforcements, fabrics for conveyor belts, safety belts, coated fabrics and plastic reinforcements with high-energy absorption. Polyester fiber is used as cushioning and insulating material in pillows, comforters and upholstery padding. Polyester fabrics are highly stain-resistantin fact, the only class of dyes which can be used to alter the color of polyester fabric are what are known as disperse dyes . 6  Polyesters are also used to make bottles, films, tarpaulin , canoes, liquid crystal displays , holograms , filters , dielectric film for capacitors , film insulation for wire and insulating tapes . Polyesters are widely used as a finish on high-quality wood products such as guitars , pianos and vehicleyacht interiors. Thixotropic properties of spray-applicable polyesters make them ideal for use on open-grain timbers, as they can quickly fill wood grain, with a high-build film thickness per coat. Cured polyesters can be sanded and polished to a high-gloss, durable finish. Industry  edit  Basics  edit  Polyester is a synthetic polymer made of purified terephthalic acid PTA or its dimethyl ester dimethyl terephthalate DMT and monoethylene glycol MEG. With 18 market share of all plastic materials produced, it ranges third after polyethylene 33.5  citation needed  and polypropylene 19.5. The main raw materials are described as follows Purified terephthalic acid PTA CAS-No.  100-21-0 Synonym 1,4 benzenedicarboxylic acid, Sum formula C 6 H 4 COOH 2 , mol. weight 166.13 Dimethylterephthalate DMT CAS-No.  120-61-6 Synonym 1,4 benzenedicarboxylic acid dimethyl ester, Sum formula C 6 H 4 COOCH 3  2 , mol. weight 194.19 Mono-ethylene glycol MEG CAS No.  107-21-1 Synonym 1,2 ethanediol, Sum formula C 2 H 6 O 2 , mol. weight 62.07 To make a polymer of high molecular weight a catalyst is needed. The most common catalyst is antimony trioxide or antimony tri-acetate Antimony trioxide ATO CAS-No.  1309-64-4 mol. weight 291.51, Sum formula Sb 2 O 3 In 2008, about 10,000 tonnes Sb 2 O 3 were used to produce around 49 million tonnes polyethylene terephthalate.  citation needed  Polyester is described as follows Polyethylene terephthalate CAS-No.  25038-59-9 Synonymsabbreviations polyester, PET, PES, Sum formula H-C 10 H 8 O 4 -n60120 OH, mol. unit weight 192.17 There are several reasons for the importance of polyester The relatively easy accessible raw materials PTA or DMT and MEG The very well understood and described simple chemical process of polyester synthesis The low toxicity level of all raw materials and side products during polyester production and processing The possibility to produce PET in a closed loop at low emissions to the environment The outstanding mechanical and chemical properties of polyester The recyclability The wide variety of intermediate and final products made of polyester. In the following table, the estimated world polyester production is shown. Main applications are textile polyester, bottle polyester resin, film polyester mainly for packaging and specialty polyesters for engineering plastics. According to this table, the worlds total polyester production might exceed 50 million tons per annum before the year 2010. World polyester production by year Product type 2002 million tonnesyear 2008 million tonnesyear Textile-PET 20 39 Resin, bottleA-PET 9 16 Film-PET 1.2 1.5 Special polyester 1 2.5 Total 31.2 59 Raw material producer  edit  The raw materials PTA, DMT, and MEG are mainly produced by large chemical companies which are sometimes integrated down to the crude oil refinery where p -Xylene is the base material to produce PTA and liquefied petroleum gas LPG is the base material to produce MEG.  citation needed  Polyester processing  edit  After the first stage of polymer production in the melt phase, the product stream divides into two different application areas which are mainly textile applications and packaging applications. In the following table, the main applications of textile and packaging of polyester are listed. Textile and packaging polyester application list melt or pellet Textile Packaging Staple fiber PSF Bottles for CSD, water, beer, juice, detergents, etc. Filaments POY, DTY, FDY A-PET film Technical yarn and tire cord Thermoforming Non-woven and spunbond biaxial-oriented film BO-PET Mono-filament Strapping Abbreviations PSF Polyester-staple fiber POY Partially oriented yarn DTY Drawn textured yarn FDY Fully drawn yarn CSD Carbonated soft drink A-PET Amorphous polyester film BO-PET Biaxial-oriented polyester film A comparable small market segment much less than 1 million tonnesyear of polyester is used to produce engineering plastics and masterbatch . In order to produce the polyester melt with a high efficiency, high-output processing steps like staple fiber 50300 tonnesday per spinning line or POY FDY up to 600 tonnesday split into about 10 spinning machines are meanwhile more and more vertically integrated direct processes. This means the polymer melt is directly converted into the textile fibers or filaments with out the common step of pelletizing . We are talking about full vertical integration when polyester is produced at one site starting from crude oil or distillation products in the chain oil  benzene  PX  PTA  PET melt  fiberfilament or bottle-grade resin. Such integrated processes are meanwhile established in more or less interrupted processes at one production site. Eastman Chemicals were the first to introduce the idea of closing the chain from PX to PET resin with their so-called INTEGREX process. The capacity of such vertically integrated production sites is 1000 tonnesday and can easily reach 2500 tonnesday. Besides the above-mentioned large processing units to produce staple fiber or yarns, there are ten thousands of small and very small processing plants, so that one can estimate that polyester is processed and recycled in more than 10 000 plants around the globe. This is without counting all the companies involved in the supply industry, beginning with engineering and processing machines and ending with special additives, stabilizers and colors. This is a gigantic industry complex and it is still growing by 48 per year, depending on the world region. Synthesis  edit  Synthesis of polyesters is generally achieved by a polycondensation reaction. See  condensation reactions in polymer chemistry. The general equation for the reaction of a diol with a diacid is   n1 ROH 2  n RCOOH 2  HOROOCRCOO n ROH  2n H 2 O Azeotrope esterification  edit  In this classical method, an alcohol and a carboxylic acid react to form a carboxylic ester. To assemble a polymer, the water formed by the reaction must be continually removed by azeotrope distillation. Alcoholic transesterification  edit  Main article Transesterification Transesterification  An alcohol-terminated oligomer and an ester-terminated oligomer condense to form an ester linkage, with loss of an alcohol. R and R are the two oligomer chains, R is a sacrificial unit such as a methyl group  methanol is the byproduct of the esterification reaction. Acylation HCl method  edit  The acid begins as an acid chloride, and thus the polycondensation proceeds with emission of hydrochloric acid HCl instead of water. This method can be carried out in solution or as an enamel . Silyl method In this variant of the HCl method, the carboxylic acid chloride is converted with the trimethyl silyl ether of the alcohol component and production of trimethyl silyl chloride is obtained Acetate method esterification  edit  Silyl acetate method Ring-opening polymerization  edit  Aliphatic polyesters can be assembled from lactones under very mild conditions, catalyzed anionically , cationically or metallorganically . A number of catalytic methods for the copolymerization of epoxides with cyclic anhydrides have also recently been shown to provide a wide array of functionalized polyesters, both saturated and unsaturated. History  edit  In 1926, United States-based E.I. du Pont de Nemours and Co. began research on large molecules and synthetic fibers. This early research, headed by W.H. Carothers, centered on what became nylon , which was the first synthetic fiber. 7  Carothers was working for duPont at the time. Carothers research was incomplete and had not advanced to investigating the polyester formed from mixing ethylene glycol and terephthalic acid. The project was revived by British scientists Whinfield and Dickson, who patented polyethylene terephthalate PET or PETE in 1941. Polyethylene terephthalate forms the basis for synthetic fibers like Dacron , Terylene and polyester. In 1946, duPont bought all legal rights from Imperial Chemical Industries ICI. 8  Biodegradation  edit  Main article Biodegradation The futuro house was made of fibreglass-reinforced polyester plastic polyester-polyurethane, and polymethylmethacrylate one of them was found to be degrading by Cyanobacteria and Archaea . 9  10  Cross-linking  edit  Unsaturated polyesters are thermosetting resins. They are generally copolymers prepared by polymerizing one or more diol with saturated and unsaturated dicarboxylic acids  maleic acid , fumaric acid ... or their anhydrides . The double bond of unsaturated polyesters reacts with a vinyl monomer, usually styrene , resulting in a 3-D cross-linked structure. This structure acts as a thermoset. The exothermic cross-linking reaction is initiated through a catalyst , usually an organic peroxide such as methyl ethyl ketone peroxide or benzoyl peroxide . Environmental concerns  edit  Pollution of freshwater and seawater habitats  edit  A team at Plymouth University in the UK spent 12 months analysing what happened when a number of synthetic materials were washed at different temperatures in domestic washing machines, using different combinations of detergents, to quantify the microfibres shed. They found that an average washing load of 6  kg could release an estimated 137,951 fibres from polyester-cotton blend fabric, 496,030 fibres from polyester and 728,789 from acrylic. Those fibers add to the general microplastics pollution . 11  12  13  Non-renewable  edit  Polyester is a synthetic petroleum-based fibre, and is therefore a non-renewable carbon-intensive resource. 14  Nearly 70 million barrels of oil are used each year to make polyester around the world, which is now the most commonly used fiber in making clothes. But it takes more than 200 years to decompose. 15  See also  edit  Denim Glycerine phthalate Microfiber Oligoester Polyamide Rayon Viscose References  edit   Mendelson, Cheryl 17 May 2005. Home Comforts The Art and Science of Keeping House . Simon and Schuster. ISBN   9780743272865 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Thermal Spray Abradable Coatings . www.gordonengland.co.uk . Retrieved 12 December 2018 .  Jia, Tony Z. Chandru, Kuhan Hongo, Yayoi Afrin, Rehana Usui, Tomohiro Myojo, Kunihiro Cleaves, H. James 22 July 2019. Membraneless polyester microdroplets as primordial compartments at the origins of life. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences  201902336. doi  10.1073pnas.1902336116 .  Chandru, Kuhan Guttenberg, Nicholas Giri, Chaitanya Hongo, Yayoi Butch, Christopher Mamajanov, Irena Cleaves, H. James 31 May 2018. Simple prebiotic synthesis of high diversity dynamic combinatorial polyester libraries. Communications Chemistry . 1 1. doi  10.1038s42004-018-0031-1 .  Rosato, Dominick V. Rosato, Donald V. Rosato, Matthew V. 2004. Plastic product material and process selection handbook . Elsevier. p.  85. ISBN   978-1-85617-431-2 .  Schuler, Mattias J. 1981. Part 8 Dyeing with disperse dyes . Dyeing Primer . AATCC. p.  21. GGKEYSK3T00EYAFR.  How polyester is made - material, manufacture, making, history, used, structure, steps, product, History . www.madehow.com . Retrieved 4 December 2018 .  History of Polyester  What is Polyester . www.whatispolyester.com . Retrieved 4 December 2018 .  Cappitelli F Principi P Sorlini C. August 2006. Biodeterioration of modern materials in contemporary collections can biotechnology help. Trends in Biotechnology . 24 8 3504. doi  10.1016j.tibtech.2006.06.001 . PMID   16782219 .  Rinaldi, Andrea 7 November 2006. Saving a fragile legacy. Biotechnology and microbiology are increasingly used to preserve and restore the worlds cultural heritage . EMBO Reports . 7 11 10751079. doi  10.1038sj.embor.7400844 . PMC   1679785 . PMID   17077862 .  OConnor, Mary Catherine 27 October 2014 Inside the lonely fight against the biggest environmental problem youve never heard of . The Guardian  Williams, Alan. Washing clothes releases thousands of microplastic particles into environment, study shows . Plymouth University . Retrieved 9 October 2016 .  Napper, I. E. Thompson, R. C. 2016. Release of Synthetic Microplastic Plastic Fibres From Domestic Washing Machines Effects of Fabric Type and Washing Conditions. Marine Pollution Bulletin . 112 12 3945. doi  10.1016j.marpolbul.2016.09.025 . hdl  10026.18163 . PMID   27686821 .  The Environmental Impacts of Polyester . tortoise  lady grey . 29 August 2016 . Retrieved 12 December 2018 .  Conca, James. Making Climate Change Fashionable - The Garment Industry Takes On Global Warming . Forbes . Retrieved 12 December 2018 . Further reading  edit  Textiles , by Sara Kadolph and Anna Langford. 8th Edition, 1998. External links  edit  Lipase catalyzed polyesterification Enzyme-Catalyzed Polymerization of End-Functionalized Polymers in a Microreactor v t e Plastics Chemical types Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene ABS Cross-linked polyethylene PEX, XLPE Ethylene vinyl acetate EVA Polymethyl methacrylate PMMA Polyethyl methacrylate PEMA Polyacrylic acid PAA Polyamide PA Polybutylene PB Polybutylene terephthalate PBT Polycarbonate PC Polyetheretherketone PEEK Polyester PEs Polyethylene PE Polyethylene terephthalate PET, PETE Polyimide PI Polylactic acid PLA Polyoxymethylene POM Polyphenyl ether PPE Polypropylene PP Polystyrene PS Polysulfone PES Polytetrafluoroethylene PTFE Polyurethane PU Polyvinyl chloride PVC Polyvinylidene chloride PVDC Styrene maleic anhydride SMA Styrene-acrylonitrile SAN Mechanical types Thermoplastic Thermosetting polymer Duroplast Corrugated plastic Polymeric foam High performance plastics Additives Polymer additive Colorants Plasticizer Stabilizer for polymers Biodegradable additives Filler materials Plastics processing injection moulding plastics extrusion stretch-blow molding thermoforming compression molding calendering transfer molding laminating fiberglass molding pultrusion filament winding vacuum forming rotational molding Products Plastics industry Commodity plastics Engineering plastics High-performance plastics Plastic film Plastic bottle Plastic bag Plastic shopping bag Plastic cutlery Blister pack Foam food container Construction Geosynthetics CategoryPlastics applications Environment and health v t e Health issues of plastics and polyhalogenated compounds PHCs Plasticizers  Phthalates DIBP DBP BBP BBzP DIHP DEHP DOP DIDP DINP Miscellaneous plasticizers Organophosphates Adipates  DEHA DOA  Monomers Bisphenol A BPA, in Polycarbonates  Vinyl chloride in PVC  Miscellaneous additives incl. PHCs PBDEs PCBs Organotins PFCs Perfluorooctanoic acid Health issues Teratogen Carcinogen Endocrine disruptor Diabetes Obesity Obesogen Polymer fume fever Pollution Plastic pollution Great Pacific garbage patch Persistent organic pollutant Dioxins List of environmental health hazards Regulations California Proposition 65 European REACH regulation Japan Toxic Substances Law Toxic Substances Control Act Waste Plastic pollution Great Pacific garbage patch Persistent organic pollutant Dioxins List of environmental health hazards Plastic recycling Biodegradable plastic Identification codes v t e Fibers Natural Plant Abac Bagasse Bamboo Coir Cotton Fique Flax Linen Hemp Jute Kapok Kenaf Pia Pine Raffia Ramie Rattan Sisal Wood Animal Alpaca Angora Byssus Camel hair Cashmere Catgut Chiengora Guanaco Hair Llama Mohair Pashmina Qiviut Rabbit Silk Tendon Spider silk Wool Vicua Yak Mineral Asbestos Synthetic Regenerated Art silk Semi-synthetic Acetate Diacetate Lyocell Modal Rayon Triacetate Mineral Glass Carbon Tenax Basalt Metallic Polymer Acrylic Aramid Twaron Kevlar Technora Nomex Microfiber Modacrylic Nylon Olefin Polyester Polyethylene Dyneema Spectra Spandex Vectran Vinylon Vinyon Zylon Category Commons v t e Fabric Woven Aertex Airdura Airguard Barathea Barkcloth Batiste Bedford cord Bengaline Beta cloth Bombazine Brilliantine Broadcloth Buckram Bunting Burlap Byrd Cloth C change Calico Cambric Canvas Chambray Capilene Cedar bark Challis Char cloth Charmeuse Charvet Cheesecloth Chiffon Chino Chintz Cloqu Cloth of gold Cordura Corduroy Duck Coutil Crape Crpe Cretonne Dazzle Denim Dimity Donegal tweed Dornix Dowlas Drill Drugget Eolienne Flannel Foulard Fustian Gabardine Gauze Gazar Georgette Ghalamkar Gingham Grenadine Grenfell Cloth Grosgrain Habutai Haircloth Harris Tweed Herringbone Himroo Hodden Irish linen Jamdani Kerseymere Khd Khaki drill Kente cloth Lam Lawn Linsey-woolsey Loden Longcloth Mackinaw Madapolam Madras Moleskin Muslin Nainsook Nankeen Ninon Oilskin Organdy Organza Osnaburg Ottoman Oxford Paduasoy Percale Pongee Poplin Rakematiz Rayadillo Rep Rinzu Ripstop Russell cord Saga Nishiki Samite Sateen Satin Saye Scarlet Seersucker Sendal Serge Scrim Shot silk Stuff Taffeta Tais Ticking Toile Tucuyo Tweed Twill Ultrasuede Vegetable flannel Ventile Vinyl coated polyester Viyella Voile Wadmal Waffle Wigan Whipcord Zephyr Zorbeez Figured woven Brocade Camlet Damask Lampas Songket Pile woven Baize Chenille Corduroy Crimplene Fustian Mockado Moquette Plush Polar fleece Terrycloth Velours du Kasa Velvet Velveteen Zibeline Nonwoven Felt Cedar bark Knitted Boiled wool Coolmax Machine knitting Milliskin Jersey Velour Netted Bobbinet Carbon fibers Lace Mesh Needlerun net Ninon Tulle Technical Ballistic nylon Ban-Lon Conductive Darlexx E-textiles Gannex Gore-Tex Lenticular Silnylon Spandex Stub-tex SympaTex Windstopper Patterns Argyle Bizarre silk Chin Herringbone Houndstooth Kelsch Paisley Pin stripes Polka dot Shweshwe Tartan plaid Tattersall Textile fibers Acrylic Alpaca Angora Cashmere Coir Cotton Eisengarn Hemp Jute Kevlar Linen Mohair Nylon Microfiber Olefin Pashmina Polyester Pia Ramie Rayon Sea silk Silk Sisal Spandex Spider silk Wool Finishing and printing Androsia Batik Beetling Bingata Bglanfini Burnout Calendering Decatising Devor Finishing Fulling Heatsetting Mercerization Moire Nap Parchmentising Rogan printing Rketsuzome Roller printing Sanforization Tenterhook Textile printing Warp printing Waxed cotton Woodblock printing Indienne Fabric mills Carlo Barbera Cerruti Dormeuil Drago Ermenegildo Zegna E. Thomas Holland  Sherry Larusmiani Loro Piana Reda Scabal Vitale Barberis Canonico Related Dyeing Fiber History of textiles History of silk Knitting Pandy Shrinkage Swatches and strike-offs Synthetic fabric Terminology Manufacturing Preservation Weaving Yarn v t e Clothing materials and parts Garment structures Armscye Collar Clerical collar Collar stays Detachable collar Cuff Dart Facing Fly Lapel Gore Hem Lining Placket Pleat Pocket Revers Ruffle Shoulder pad Strap Sleeve Train Waistband Yoke Textiles Natural Cotton Fur Linen Silk Wool Synthetic Artificial leather Elastic Nylon Polyester Rayon Spandex Animal hides  Leather Calf Deer Goat Kangaroo Ostrich Seal Sheep Snake Stingray Fasteners Back closure Belt hook Buckle Button Buttonhole Frog Shank Hook-and-eye Hook and loop Velcro Snap Zipper Seams Neckline Bustline Waistline Hemline Authority control NDL  00569148 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitlePolyester oldid913840675  Categories  Carboxylate esters Packaging materials Plastics Polyesters Synthetic resins Synthetic fibers Thermoplastics Dielectrics Airship technology Thermosetting plastics Hidden categories Articles needing additional references from March 2012 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2012 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2011 Use dmy dates from November 2016 Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers