Electromechanics From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search In engineering , electromechanics 1  2  3  4  combines processes and procedures drawn from electrical engineering and mechanical engineering . Electromechanics focuses on the interaction of electrical and mechanical systems as a whole and how the two systems interact with each other. This process is especially prominent in systems such as those of DC Machines which can be designed and operated to generate power from a mechanical process  generator  or used to power a mechanical effect  motor . Electrical engineering in this context also encompasses electronics engineering . Electromechanical devices are ones which have both electrical and mechanical processes. Strictly speaking, a manually operated switch is an electromechanical component due to the mechanical movement causing an electrical output. Though this is true, the term is usually understood to refer to devices which involve an electrical signal to create mechanical movement, or vice versa mechanical movement to create an electric signal. Often involving electromagnetic principles such as in relays , which allow a voltage or current to control another, usually isolated circuit voltage or current by mechanically switching sets of contacts, and solenoids , by which a voltage can actuate a moving linkage as in solenoid valves. Before the development of modern electronics, electromechanical devices were widely used in complicated subsystems of parts, including electric typewriters , teleprinters , clocks , initial television systems, and the very early electromechanical digital computers . Contents 1 History 2 Modern practice 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading History  edit  The first electric motor was invented in 1821 by Michael Faraday . The motor was developed only a year after Hans Christian rsted discovered that the flow of electric current creates a proportional magnetic field. 5  This early motor was simply a wire partially submerged into a glass of mercury with a magnet at the bottom. When the wire was connected to a battery a magnetic field was created and this interaction with the magnetic field given off by the magnet caused the wire to spin. Ten years later the first electric generator was invented, again by Michael Faraday. This generator consisted of a magnet passing through a coil of wire and inducing current that was measured by a galvanometer. Faradays research and experiments into electricity are the basis of most of modern electromechanical principles known today. 6  Interest in electromechanics surged with the research into long distance communication.The Industrial Revolution s rapid increase in production gave rise to a demand for intracontinental communication, allowing electromechanics to make its way into public service. Relays originated with telegraphy as electromechanical devices were used to regenerate telegraph signals. The Strowger switch , the Panel switch , and similar devices were widely used in early automated telephone exchanges . Crossbar switches were first widely installed in the middle 20th century in Sweden , the United States , Canada , and Great Britain , and these quickly spread to the rest of the world. Electromechanical systems saw a massive leap in progress from 1910-1945 as the world was put into global war twice. World War I saw a burst of new electromechanics as spotlights and radios were used by all countries. 7  By World War II , countries had developed and centralized their military around the versatility and power of electromechanics. One example of these still used today is the alternator , which was created to power military equipment in the 1950s and later repurposed for automobiles in the 1960s. Post-war America greatly benefited from the militarys development of electromechanics as household work was quickly be replaced by electromechanical systems such as microwaves, refrigerators, and washing machines. The electromechanical television systems of the late 19th century were less successful. Electric typewriters developed, up to the 1980s, as power-assisted typewriters. They contained a single electrical component, the motor. Where the keystroke had previously moved a typebar directly, now it engaged mechanical linkages that directed mechanical power from the motor into the typebar. This was also true of the later IBM Selectric . At Bell Labs , in the 1946, the Bell Model V computer was developed. It was an electromechanical relay-based device cycles took seconds. In 1968 electromechanical systems were still under serious consideration for an aircraft flight control computer, until a device based on large scale integration electronics was adopted in the Central Air Data Computer . Modern practice  edit  Today, electromechanical processes are mainly used by power companies. All fuel based generators convert mechanical movement to electrical power. Some renewable energies such as wind and hydroelectric are powered by mechanical systems that also convert movement to electricity. In the last thirty years of the 20th century, equipment which would generally have used electromechanical devices became less expensive. This equipment became cheaper because it used more reliably integrated microcontroller circuits containing ultimately a few million transistors, and a program to carry out the same task through logic. With electromechanical components there were only moving parts, such as mechanical electric actuators . This more reliable logic has replaced most electromechanical devices, because any point in a system which must rely on mechanical movement for proper operation will inevitably have mechanical wear and eventually fail. Properly designed electronic circuits without moving parts will continue to operate correctly almost indefinitely and are used in most simple feedback control s ystems. Circuits without moving parts appear in a large number of items from traffic lights to washing machines . Another electromechanical device is Piezoelectric devices , but they do not use electromagnetic principles. Piezoelectric devices can create sound or vibration from an electrical signal or create an electrical signal from sound or mechanical vibration. To become an electromechanical engineer, typical college courses involve mathematics, engineering, computer science, designing of machines, and other automotive classes that help gain skill in troubleshooting and analyzing issues with machines. To be an electromechanical engineer a bachelors degree is required, usually in electrical, mechanical, or electromechanical engineerin g. As of April 2018, only two universities, Michigan Technological University and Wentworth Institute of Technology , offer the major of electromechanical engineering. To enter the electromechanical field as an entry level technician, an associative degree is all that is required. As of 2016, approximately 13,800 people work as electro-mechanical technicians in the US. The job outlook for 2016 to 2026 for technicians is 4 growth which is about an employment change of 500 positions. This outlook is slower than average. 8  See also  edit  Electro-Mechanical Modeling Adding machine Automation Automatic transmission system Electric machine Electric power conversion Electricity meter Enigma machine Kerrison Predictor Mechatronics Power engineering Relay Robotics SAW filter Stepping switch Solenoid valve Thermostat Torpedo Data Computer Unit record equipment References  edit  Citations  Course in Electro-mechanics , for Students in Electrical Engineering, 1st Term of 3d Year, Columbia University, Adapted from Prof. F.E. Niphers Electricity and Magnetism. By Fitzhugh Townsend . 1901.  Szolc T. Konowrocki R.  Michajow M. Pregowska A. 2014. An investigation of the dynamic electromechanical coupling effects in machine drive systems driven by asynchronous motors. Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing . Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing, Vol.49, pp.118-134. 49 12 118134. doi  10.1016j.ymssp.2014.04.004 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  The Elements of Electricity , Part V. Electro-Mechanics . By Wirt Robinson . John Wiley  sons, Incorporated, 1922.  Konowrocki R.  Szolc T. Pochanke A. Pregowska A. 2016. An influence of the stepping motor control and friction models on precise positioning of the complex mechanical system. Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing . Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing, Vol.70-71, pp.397-413. 70-71 397413. doi  10.1016j.ymssp.2015.09.030 . ISSN   0888-3270 .  Michael Faradays electric magnetic rotation apparatus motor . Retrieved 2018-04-14 .  Michael Faradays generator . Retrieved 2018-04-14 .  WWI Technology and the weapons of war  NCpedia . www.ncpedia.org . Retrieved 2018-04-22 .  Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Outlook Handbook, Electro-mechanical Technicians, on the Internet at httpwww.bls.govooharchitecture-and-engineeringelectro-mechanical-technicians.htm visited April 13, 2018. Sources Davim, J. Paulo, editor 2011 Mechatronics , John Wiley  Sons ISBN   978-1-84821-308-1 . Furlani, Edward P. August 15, 2001. Permanent Magnet and Electromechanical Devices Materials, Analysis and Applications . Academic Press Series in Electromagnetism. San Diego Academic Press . ISBN   978-0-12-269951-1 . OCLC   47726317 . Krause, Paul C. Wasynczuk, Oleg 1989. Electromechanical Motion Devices . McGraw-Hill Series in Electrical and Computer Engineering. New York McGraw-Hill . ISBN   978-0-07-035494-4 . OCLC   18224514 . Szolc T., Konowrocki R., Michajlow M., Pregowska A., An Investigation of the Dynamic Electromechanical Coupling Effects in Machine Drive Systems Driven by Asynchronous Motors, Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing, ISSN   0888-3270 , Vol.49, pp.  118134, 2014 WWI Technology and the weapons of war  NCpedia. www.ncpedia.org . Retrieved 2018-04-22. Further reading  edit  A first course in electromechanics. By Hugh Hildreth Skilling . Wiley, 1960. Electromechanics a first course in electromechanical energy conversion, Volume 1. By Hugh Hildreth Skilling . R. E. Krieger Pub. Co., Jan 1, 1979. Electromechanics and electrical machinery. By J. F. Lindsay , M. H. Rashid . Prentice-Hall, 1986. Electromechanical motion devices. By Hi-Dong Chai . Prentice Hall PTR, 1998. Mechatronics Electromechanics and Contromechanics. By Denny K. Miu . Springer London, Limited, 2011. v t e Engineering Civil Architectural Construction Environmental Earthquake Geotechnical Hydraulic Mining Structural Transportation Mechanical Acoustical Aerospace Automotive Marine Railway Thermal Electrical Computer Control Electromechanics Electronics Microwaves Power Radio Frequency Telecommunications Chemical Biochemical Biological Molecular Petroleum Process Reaction Interdisciplinary Audio Biomedical Engineering mathematics Engineering mechanics Engineering physics Engineering science Fire Industrial Information Materials science Ceramics Metallurgy Polymer Mechatronics Military Nanotechnology Nuclear Optical Photonics Privacy Robotics Sanitary Security Software Systems Glossaries Engineering Aerospace engineering Civil engineering Electrical and electronics engineering Mechanical engineering Structural engineering List of engineering branches CategoryEngineering Engineering portal Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleElectromechanics oldid906056089  Categories  Electrical engineering Mechanics Electrodynamics Hidden categories CS1 long volume value