Algorithmic efficiency From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Not to be confused with optimization, which is discussed in program optimization , optimizing compiler , loop optimization , object code optimizer , etc.. In computer science , algorithmic efficiency is a property of an algorithm which relates to the number of computational resources used by the algorithm. An algorithm must be analyzed to determine its resource usage, and the efficiency of an algorithm can be measured based on usage of different resources. Algorithmic efficiency can be thought of as analogous to engineering productivity for a repeating or continuous process. For maximum efficiency we wish to minimize resource usage. However, different resources such as time and space complexity cannot be compared directly, so which of two algorithms is considered to be more efficient often depends on which measure of efficiency is considered most important. For example, bubble sort and timsort are both algorithms to sort a list of items from smallest to largest. Bubble sort sorts the list in time proportional to the number of elements squared  O  n 2  displaystyle scriptstyle mathcal Oleftn2right , see Big O notation , but only requires a small amount of extra memory which is constant with respect to the length of the list  O  1  textstyle scriptstyle mathcal Oleft1right . Timsort sorts the list in time linearithmic proportional to a quantity times its logarithm in the lists length  O  n log  n  textstyle scriptstyle mathcal Oleftnlog nright , but has a space requirement linear in the length of the list  O  n  textstyle scriptstyle mathcal Oleftnright . If large lists must be sorted at high speed for a given application, timsort is a better choice however, if minimizing the memory footprint of the sorting is more important, bubble sort is a better choice. Contents 1 Background 2 Overview 2.1 Theoretical analysis 2.2 Benchmarking measuring performance 2.3 Implementation concerns 3 Measures of resource usage 3.1 Time 3.1.1 Theory 3.1.2 Practice 3.2 Space 3.2.1 Caching and memory hierarchy 4 Criticism of the current state of programming 5 Competitions for the best algorithms 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Background  edit  The importance of efficiency with respect to time was emphasised by Ada Lovelace in 1843 as applying to Charles Babbage s mechanical analytical engine In almost every computation a great variety of arrangements for the succession of the processes is possible, and various considerations must influence the selections amongst them for the purposes of a calculating engine. One essential object is to choose that arrangement which shall tend to reduce to a minimum the time necessary for completing the calculation 1  Early electronic computers were severely limited both by the speed of operations and the amount of memory available. In some cases it was realized that there was a spacetime trade-off , whereby a task could be handled either by using a fast algorithm which used quite a lot of working memory, or by using a slower algorithm which used very little working memory. The engineering trade-off was then to use the fastest algorithm which would fit in the available memory. Modern computers are significantly faster than the early computers, and have a much larger amount of memory available  Gigabytes instead of Kilobytes . Nevertheless, Donald Knuth emphasised that efficiency is still an important consideration In established engineering disciplines a 12 improvement, easily obtained, is never considered marginal and I believe the same viewpoint should prevail in software engineering 2  Overview  edit  An algorithm is considered efficient if its resource consumption, also known as computational cost, is at or below some acceptable level. Roughly speaking, acceptable means it will run in a reasonable amount of time or space on an available computer, typically as a function of the size of the input. Since the 1950s computers have seen dramatic increases in both the available computational power and in the available amount of memory, so current acceptable levels would have been unacceptable even 10 years ago. In fact, thanks to the approximate doubling of computer power every 2 years , tasks that are acceptably efficient on modern smartphones and embedded systems may have been unacceptably inefficient for industrial servers 10 years ago. Computer manufacturers frequently bring out new models, often with higher performance . Software costs can be quite high, so in some cases the simplest and cheapest way of getting higher performance might be to just buy a faster computer, provided it is compatible with an existing computer. There are many ways in which the resources used by an algorithm can be measured the two most common measures are speed and memory usage other measures could include transmission speed, temporary disk usage, long-term disk usage, power consumption, total cost of ownership , response time to external stimuli, etc. Many of these measures depend on the size of the input to the algorithm, i.e. the amount of data to be processed. They might also depend on the way in which the data is arranged for example, some sorting algorithms perform poorly on data which is already sorted, or which is sorted in reverse order. In practice, there are other factors which can affect the efficiency of an algorithm, such as requirements for accuracy andor reliability. As detailed below, the way in which an algorithm is implemented can also have a significant effect on actual efficiency, though many aspects of this relate to optimization issues. Theoretical analysis  edit  In the theoretical analysis of algorithms , the normal practice is to estimate their complexity in the asymptotic sense. The most commonly used notation to describe resource consumption or complexity is Donald Knuth s Big O notation , representing the complexity of an algorithm as a function of the size of the input n textstyle scriptstyle n . Big O notation is an asymptotic measure of function complexity, where f  n   O  g  n   textstyle scriptstyle fleftnright,,mathcal Oleftgleftnrightright roughly means the time requirement for an algorithm is proportional to g  n  displaystyle scriptstyle gleftnright , omitting lower-order terms that contribute less than g  n  displaystyle scriptstyle gleftnright to the growth of the function as n displaystyle scriptstyle n grows arbitrarily large . This estimate may be misleading when n textstyle scriptstyle n is small, but is generally sufficiently accurate when n textstyle scriptstyle n is large as the notation is asymptotic. For example, bubble sort may be faster than merge sort when only a few items are to be sorted however either implementation is likely to meet performance requirements for a small list. Typically, programmers are interested in algorithms that scale efficiently to large input sizes, and merge sort is preferred over bubble sort for lists of length encountered in most data-intensive programs. Some examples of Big O notation applied to algorithms asymptotic time complexity include Notation Name Examples O  1  displaystyle mathcal O1, constant Finding the median from a sorted list of measurements Using a constant-size lookup table  Using a suitable hash function for looking up an item. O  log  n  displaystyle mathcal Olog n, logarithmic Finding an item in a sorted array with a binary search or a balanced search tree as well as all operations in a Binomial heap . O  n  displaystyle mathcal On, linear Finding an item in an unsorted list or a malformed tree worst case or in an unsorted array Adding two n -bit integers by ripple carry . O  n log  n  displaystyle mathcal Onlog n, linearithmic , loglinear, or quasilinear Performing a Fast Fourier transform  heapsort , quicksort  best and average case , or merge sort O  n 2  displaystyle mathcal On2, quadratic Multiplying two n -digit numbers by a simple algorithm  bubble sort worst case or naive implementation, Shell sort , quicksort  worst case , selection sort or insertion sort O  c n  , c  1 displaystyle mathcal Ocn,c 1 exponential Finding the optimal non- approximate  solution to the travelling salesman problem using dynamic programming  determining if two logical statements are equivalent using brute-force search Benchmarking measuring performance  edit  For new versions of software or to provide comparisons with competitive systems, benchmarks are sometimes used, which assist with gauging an algorithms relative performance. If a new sort algorithm is produced, for example, it can be compared with its predecessors to ensure that at least it is efficient as before with known data, taking into consideration any functional improvements. Benchmarks can be used by customers when comparing various products from alternative suppliers to estimate which product will best suit their specific requirements in terms of functionality and performance. For example, in the mainframe world certain proprietary sort products from independent software companies such as Syncsort compete with products from the major suppliers such as IBM for speed. Some benchmarks provide opportunities for producing an analysis comparing the relative speed of various compiled and interpreted languages for example 3  4  and The Computer Language Benchmarks Game compares the performance of implementations of typical programming problems in several programming languages. Even creating  do it yourself  benchmarks can demonstrate the relative performance of different programming languages, using a variety of user specified criteria. This is quite simple, as a Nine language performance roundup by Christopher W. Cowell-Shah demonstrates by example. 5  Implementation concerns  edit  Implementation issues can also have an effect on efficiency, such as the choice of programming language, or the way in which the algorithm is actually coded, 6  or the choice of a compiler for a particular language, or the compilation options used, or even the operating system being used. In many cases a language implemented by an interpreter may be much slower than a language implemented by a compiler. 3  See the articles on just-in-time compilation and interpreted languages . There are other factors which may affect time or space issues, but which may be outside of a programmers control these include data alignment , data granularity , cache locality , cache coherency , garbage collection , instruction-level parallelism , multi-threading at either a hardware or software level, simultaneous multitasking , and subroutine calls. 7  Some processors have capabilities for vector processing , which allow a single instruction to operate on multiple operands  it may or may not be easy for a programmer or compiler to use these capabilities. Algorithms designed for sequential processing may need to be completely redesigned to make use of parallel processing , or they could be easily reconfigured. As parallel and distributed computing grow in importance in the late 2010s , more investments are being made into efficient high-level Application programming interfaces for parallel and distributed computing systems such as CUDA , TensorFlow , Hadoop , OpenMP and MPI . Another problem which can arise in programming is that processors compatible with the same instruction set such as x86-64 or ARM  may implement an instruction in different ways, so that instructions which are relatively fast on some models may be relatively slow on other models. This often presents challenges to optimizing compilers , which must have a great amount of knowledge of the specific CPU and other hardware available on the compilation target to best optimize a program for performance. In the extreme case, a compiler may be forced to emulate instructions not supported on a compilation target platform, forcing it to generate code or link an external library call to produce a result that is otherwise incomputable on that platform, even if it is natively supported and more efficient in hardware on other platforms. This is often the case in embedded systems with respect to floating-point arithmetic , where small and low-power microcontrollers often lack hardware support for floating-point arithmetic and thus require computationally expensive software routines to produce floating point calculations. Measures of resource usage  edit  Measures are normally expressed as a function of the size of the input n displaystyle scriptstyle n . The two most common measures are Time  how long does the algorithm take to complete Space  how much working memory typically RAM is needed by the algorithm This has two aspects the amount of memory needed by the code auxiliary space usage, and the amount of memory needed for the data on which the code operates intrinsic space usage. For computers whose power is supplied by a battery e.g. laptops and smartphones , or for very longlarge calculations e.g. supercomputers , other measures of interest are Direct power consumption  power needed directly to operate the computer. Indirect power consumption  power needed for cooling, lighting, etc. As of 2018 update  , power consumption is growing as an important metric for computational tasks of all types and at all scales ranging from embedded Internet of things devices to system-on-chip devices to server farms . This trend is often referred to as green computing . Less common measures of computational efficiency may also be relevant in some cases Transmission size  bandwidth could be a limiting factor. Data compression can be used to reduce the amount of data to be transmitted. Displaying a picture or image e.g. Google logo  can result in transmitting tens of thousands of bytes 48K in this case compared with transmitting six bytes for the text Google. This is important for IO bound computing tasks. External space  space needed on a disk or other external memory device this could be for temporary storage while the algorithm is being carried out, or it could be long-term storage needed to be carried forward for future reference. Response time  latency  this is particularly relevant in a real-time application when the computer system must respond quickly to some external event . Total cost of ownership  particularly if a computer is dedicated to one particular algorithm. Time  edit  Theory  edit  Analyze the algorithm, typically using time complexity analysis to get an estimate of the running time as a function of the size of the input data. The result is normally expressed using Big O notation . This is useful for comparing algorithms, especially when a large amount of data is to be processed. More detailed estimates are needed to compare algorithm performance when the amount of data is small, although this is likely to be of less importance. Algorithms which include parallel processing may be more difficult to analyze . Practice  edit  Use a benchmark to time the use of an algorithm. Many programming languages have an available function which provides CPU time usage . For long-running algorithms the elapsed time could also be of interest. Results should generally be averaged over several tests. Run-based profiling can be very sensitive to hardware configuration and the possibility of other programs or tasks running at the same time in a multi-processing and multi-programming environment. This sort of test also depends heavily on the selection of a particular programming language, compiler, and compiler options, so algorithms being compared must all be implemented under the same conditions. Space  edit  This section is concerned with the use of memory resources  registers , cache , RAM , virtual memory , secondary memory  while the algorithm is being executed. As for time analysis above, analyze the algorithm, typically using space complexity analysis to get an estimate of the run-time memory needed as a function as the size of the input data. The result is normally expressed using Big O notation . There are up to four aspects of memory usage to consider The amount of memory needed to hold the code for the algorithm. The amount of memory needed for the input data . The amount of memory needed for any output data . Some algorithms, such as sorting, often rearrange the input data and dont need any additional space for output data. This property is referred to as  in-place  operation. The amount of memory needed as working space during the calculation. This includes local variables and any stack space needed by routines called during a calculation this stack space can be significant for algorithms which use recursive techniques. Early electronic computers, and early home computers, had relatively small amounts of working memory. For example, the 1949 Electronic Delay Storage Automatic Calculator EDSAC had a maximum working memory of 1024 17-bit words, while the 1980 Sinclair ZX80 came initially with 1024 8-bit bytes of working memory. In the late 2010s , it is typical for personal computers to have between 4 and 32 GB of RAM, an increase of over 300 million times as much memory. Caching and memory hierarchy  edit  Further information Memory hierarchy Current computers can have relatively large amounts of memory possibly Gigabytes, so having to squeeze an algorithm into a confined amount of memory is much less of a problem than it used to be. But the presence of four different categories of memory can be significant Processor registers , the fastest of computer memory technologies with the least amount of storage space. Most direct computation on modern computers occurs with source and destination operands in registers before being updated to the cache, main memory and virtual memory if needed. On a processor core , there are typically on the order of hundreds of bytes or fewer of register availability, although a register file may contain more physical registers than architectural registers defined in the instruction set architecture. Cache memory is the second fastest and second smallest memory available in the memory hierarchy. Caches are present in CPUs, GPUs, hard disk drives and external peripherals, and are typically implemented in static RAM . Memory caches are multi-leveled  lower levels are larger, slower and typically shared between processor cores in multi-core processors . In order to process operands in cache memory, a processing unit must fetch the data from the cache, perform the operation in registers and write the data back to the cache. This operates at speeds comparable about 2-10 times slower with the CPU or GPUs arithmetic logic unit or floating-point unit if in the L1 cache . 8  It is about 10 times slower if there is an L1 cache miss and it must be retrieved from and written to the L2 cache , and a further 10 times slower if there is an L2 cache miss and it must be retrieved from an L3 cache , if present. Main physical memory is most often implemented in dynamic RAM DRAM. The main memory is much larger typically gigabytes compared to 8 megabytes  than an L3 CPU cache, with read and write latencies typically 10-100 times slower. 8  As of 2018 update  , RAM is increasingly implemented on-chip of processors, as CPU or GPU memory . Virtual memory is most often implemented in terms of secondary storage such as a hard disk , and is an extension to the memory hierarchy that has much larger storage space but much larger latency, typically around 1000 times slower than a cache miss for a value in RAM. 8  While originally motivated to create the impression of higher amounts of memory being available than were truly available, virtual memory is more important in contemporary usage for its time-space tradeoff and enabling the usage of virtual machines . 8  Cache misses from main memory are called page faults , and incur huge performance penalties on programs. An algorithm whose memory needs will fit in cache memory will be much faster than an algorithm which fits in main memory, which in turn will be very much faster than an algorithm which has to resort to virtual memory. Because of this, cache replacement policies are extremely important to high-performance computing, as are cache-aware programming and data alignment . To further complicate the issue, some systems have up to three levels of cache memory, with varying effective speeds. Different systems will have different amounts of these various types of memory, so the effect of algorithm memory needs can vary greatly from one system to another. In the early days of electronic computing, if an algorithm and its data wouldnt fit in main memory then the algorithm couldnt be used. Nowadays the use of virtual memory appears to provide lots of memory, but at the cost of performance. If an algorithm and its data will fit in cache memory, then very high speed can be obtained in this case minimizing space will also help min imize time. This is called the principle of locality , and can be subdivided into locality of reference , spatial locality and temporal locality . An algorithm which will not fit completely in cache memory but which exhibits locality of reference may perform reasonably well. Criticism of the current state of programming  edit  David May FRS a British computer scientist and currently Professor of Computer Science at University of Bristol and founder and CTO of XMOS Semiconductor , believes one of the problems is that there is a reliance on Moores law to solve inefficiencies. He has advanced an alternative to Moores law  Mays law  stated as follows 9  Software efficiency halves every 18 months, compensating Moores Law May goes on to state In ubiquitous systems, halving the instructions executed can double the battery life and big data sets bring big opportunities for better software and algorithms Reducing the number of operations from N x N to N x logN has a dramatic effect when N is large ... for N  30 billion, this change is as good as 50 years of technology improvements. Software author Adam N. Rosenburg in his blog  The failure of the Digital computer , has described the current state of programming as nearing the Software event horizon, alluding to the fictitious  shoe event horizon  described by Douglas Adams in his Hitchhikers Guide to the Galaxy book 10  . He estimates there has been a 70  dB factor loss of productivity or 99.99999 percent, of its ability to deliver the goods, since the 1980sWhen Arthur C. Clarke compared the reality of computing in 2001 to the computer HAL 9000 in his book 2001 A Space Odyssey , he pointed out how wonderfully small and powerful computers were but how disappointing computer programming had become. Competitions for the best algorithms  edit  The following competitions invite entries for the best algorithms based on some arbitrary criteria decided by the judges Wired magazine 11  See also  edit  Analysis of algorithms how to determine the resources needed by an algorithm Arithmetic coding a form of variable-length entropy encoding for efficient data compression Associative array a data structure that can be made more efficient using Patricia trees or Judy arrays Benchmark a method for measuring comparative execution times in defined cases Best, worst and average case considerations for estimating execution times in three scenarios Binary search algorithm a simple and efficient technique for searching sorted arrays Branch table a technique for reducing instruction path-length, size of machine code , and often also memory Comparison of programming paradigms paradigm specific performance considerations Compiler optimization compiler-derived optimization Computational complexity of mathematical operations Computational complexity theory Computer performance computer hardware metrics Data compression reducing transmission bandwidth and disk storage Database index a data structure that improves the speed of data retrieval operations on a database table Entropy encoding encoding data efficiently using frequency of occurrence of strings as a criterion for substitution Garbage collection automatic freeing of memory after use Green computing a move to implement greener technologies, consuming less resources Huffman algorithm an algorithm for efficient data encoding Improving Managed code Performance Microsoft MSDN Library Locality of reference for avoidance of caching delays caused by non-local memory access Loop optimization Memory management Optimization computer science Performance analysis methods of measuring actual performance of an algorithm at run-time Real-time computing further examples of time-critical applications Run-time analysis estimation of expected run-times and an algorithms scalability Simultaneous multithreading Sorting algorithm   Comparison of algorithms Speculative execution or Eager execution Branch prediction Super-threading Hyper-threading Threaded code similar to virtual method table or branch table Virtual method table branch table with dynamically assigned pointers for dispatching References  edit   Green, Christopher, Classics in the History of Psychology , retrieved 19 May 2013 .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Knuth, Donald 1974, Structured Programming with go-to Statements PDF , Computing Surveys , 6 4 261301, CiteSeerX   10.1.1.103.6084 , doi  10.1145356635.356640 , archived from the original PDF on 24 August 2009 , retrieved 19 May 2013 Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   a b Floating Point Benchmark Comparing Languages Fourmilog None Dare Call It Reason . Fourmilab.ch. 4 August 2005 . Retrieved 14 December 2011 .  Whetstone Benchmark History . Roylongbottom.org.uk . Retrieved 14 December 2011 .  Staff, OSNews. Nine Language Performance Round-up Benchmarking Math  File IO . www.osnews.com . Retrieved 18 September 2018 .  Kriegel, Hans-Peter  Schubert, Erich Zimek, Arthur 2016. The black art of runtime evaluation Are we comparing algorithms or implementations. Knowledge and Information Systems . 52 2 341378. doi  10.1007s10115-016-1004-2 . ISSN   0219-1377 .  Guy Lewis Steele, Jr. Debunking the Expensive Procedure Call Myth, or, Procedure Call Implementations Considered Harmful, or, Lambda The Ultimate GOTO. MIT AI Lab. AI Lab Memo AIM-443. October 1977. 1  a b c d Hennessy, John L Patterson, David A Asanovi, Krste Bakos, Jason D Colwell, Robert P Bhattacharjee, Abhishek Conte, Thomas M Duato, Jos Franklin, Diana Goldberg, David Jouppi, Norman P Li, Sheng Muralimanohar, Naveen Peterson, Gregory D Pinkston, Timothy Mark Ranganathan, Prakash Wood, David Allen Young, Clifford Zaky, Amr 2011. Computer Architecture a Quantitative Approach Sixth ed.. ISBN   978-0128119051 . OCLC   983459758 .  Archived copy PDF . Archived from the original PDF on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 23 February 2009 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help  CS1 maint archived copy as title  link   The Failure of the Digital Computer .  Fagone, Jason 29 November 2010. Teen Mathletes Do Battle at Algorithm Olympics . Wired . External links  edit  Wikibooks has a book on the topic of Optimizing Code for Speed Animation of the Boyer-Moore algorithm  Java Applet  How algorithms shape our world. A TED conference Talk by Kevin Slavin. Misconceptions about algorithmic efficiency in high-schools v t e Computer science Note This template roughly follows the 2012 ACM Computing Classification System . Hardware Printed circuit board Peripheral Integrated circuit Very Large Scale Integration Systems on Chip SoCs Energy consumption Green computing Electronic design automation Hardware acceleration Computer systems organization Computer architecture Embedded system Real-time computing Dependability Networks Network architecture Network protocol Network components Network scheduler Network performance evaluation Network service Software organization Interpreter Middleware Virtual machine Operating system Software quality Software notations and tools Programming paradigm Programming language Compiler Domain-specific language Modeling language Software framework Integrated development environment Software configuration management Software library Software repository Software development Software development process Requirements analysis Software design Software construction Software deployment Software maintenance Programming team Open-source model Theory of computation Model of computation Formal language Automata theory Computational complexity theory Logic Semantics Algorithms Algorithm design Analysis of algorithms Algorithmic efficiency Randomized algorithm Computational geometry Mathematics of computing Discrete mathematics Probability Statistics Mathematical software Information theory Mathematical analysis Numerical analysis Information systems Database management system Information storage systems Enterprise information system Social information systems Geographic information system Decision support system Process control system Multimedia information system Data mining Digital library Computing platform Digital marketing World Wide Web Information retrieval Security Cryptography Formal methods Security services Intrusion detection system Hardware security Network security Information security Application security Humancomputer interaction Interaction design Social computing Ubiquitous computing Visualization Accessibility Concurrency Concurrent computing Parallel computing Distributed computing Multithreading Multiprocessing Artificial intelligence Natural language processing Knowledge representation and reasoning Computer vision Automated planning and scheduling Search methodology Control method Philosophy of artificial intelligence Distributed artificial intelligence Machine learning Supervised learning Unsupervised learning Reinforcement learning Multi-task learning Cross-validation Graphics Animation Rendering Image manipulation Graphics processing unit Mixed reality Virtual reality Image compression Solid modeling Applied computing E-commerce Enterprise software Computational mathematics Computational physics Computational chemistry Computational biology Computational social science Computational engineering Computational healthcare Digital art Electronic publishing Cyberwarfare Electronic voting Video games Word processing Operations research Educational technology Document management Book Category Portal Outline WikiProject Commons Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleAlgorithmic_efficiency oldid911759787  Categories  Analysis of algorithms Computer performance Software optimization Hidden categories CS1 errors deprecated parameters CS1 maint archived copy as title Use dmy dates from June 2013 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2018 All articles containing potentially dated statements