Robotics From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Design, construction, operation, and application of robots The Shadow robot hand system Robotics is an interdisciplinary branch of engineering and science that includes mechanical engineering , electronic engineering , information engineering , computer science , and others. Robotics deals with the design, construction, operation, and use of robots , as well as computer systems for their control, sensory feedback , and information processing . These technologies are used to develop machines that can substitute for humans and replicate human actions. Robots can be used in many situations and for lots of purposes, but today many are used in dangerous environments including bomb detection and deactivation , manufacturing processes, or where humans cannot survive e.g. in space, under water, in high heat, and clean up and containment of hazardous materials and radiation. Robots can take on any form but some are made to resemble humans in appearance. This is said to help in the acceptance of a robot in certain replicative behaviors usually performed by people. Such robots attemp t to replicate walking, lifting, speech, cognition, or any other human activity. Many of todays robots are inspired by nature, contributing to the field of bio-inspired robotics . The concept of creating machines that can operate autonomously dates back to classical times , but research into the functionality and potential uses of robots did not grow substantially until the 20th century. Throughout history, it has been frequently assumed by various scholars, inventors, engineers, and technicians that robots will one day be able to mimic human behavior and manage tasks in a human-like fashion. Today, robotics is a rapidly growing field, as techn ological advances continue researching, designing, and building new robots serve various practical purposes, whether domestically , commercially , or militarily . Many robots are built to do jobs that are hazardous to people, such as defusing bombs, finding survivors in unstable ruins, and exploring mines and shipwrecks. Robotics is also used in STEM science, technology , engineering, and mathematics as a teaching aid. 1  The advent of nanorobots, microscopic robots that can be injected into the human body, could revolutionize medicine and human health. 2  Robotics is a branch of engineering that involves the conception, design, manufacture, and operation of robots. This field overlaps with electronics , computer science , artificial intelligence , mechatronics , nanotechnology and bioengineering . 3  .mw-parser-output .toclimit-2 .toclevel-1 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-3 .toclevel-2 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-4 .toclevel-3 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-5 .toclevel-4 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-6 .toclevel-5 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-7 .toclevel-6 uldisplaynone Contents 1 Etymology 2 History 3 Robotic aspects 4 Applications 5 Components 5.1 Power source 5.2 Actuation 5.2.1 Electric motors 5.2.2 Linear actuators 5.2.3 Series elastic actuators 5.2.4 Air muscles 5.2.5 Muscle wire 5.2.6 Electroactive polymers 5.2.7 Piezo motors 5.2.8 Elastic nanotubes 5.3 Sensing 5.3.1 Touch 5.3.2 Vision 5.3.3 Other 5.4 Manipulation 5.4.1 Mechanical grippers 5.4.2 Vacuum grippers 5.4.3 General purpose effectors 5.5 Locomotion 5.5.1 Rolling robots 5.5.1.1 Two-wheeled balancing robots 5.5.1.2 One-wheeled balancing robots 5.5.1.3 Spherical orb robots 5.5.1.4 Six-wheeled robots 5.5.1.5 Tracked robots 5.5.2 Walking applied to robots 5.5.2.1 ZMP technique 5.5.2.2 Hopping 5.5.2.3 Dynamic balancing controlled falling 5.5.2.4 Passive dynamics 5.5.3 Other methods of locomotion 5.5.3.1 Flying 5.5.3.2 Snaking 5.5.3.3 Skating 5.5.3.4 Climbing 5.5.3.5 Swimming Piscine 5.5.3.6 Sailing 5.6 Environmental interaction and navigation 5.7 Human-robot interaction 5.7.1 Speech recognition 5.7.2 Robotic voice 5.7.3 Gestures 5.7.4 Facial expression 5.7.5 Artificial emotions 5.7.6 Personality 5.7.7 Social Intelligence 6 Control 6.1 Autonomy levels 7 Research 7.1 Dynamics and kinematics 7.2 Bionics and biomimetics 7.3 Quantum computing 8 Education and training 8.1 Career training 8.2 Certification 8.3 Summer robotics camp 8.4 Robotics competitions 8.4.1 Competitions for Younger Children 8.4.2 Competitions for Children Ages 9-14 8.4.3 Competitions for Teenagers 8.4.4 Competitions for Older Students 8.4.5 Competitions Open to Anyone 8.5 Robotics afterschool programs 9 Employment 10 Occupational safety and health implications 11 See also 12 References 13 Further reading 14 External links Etymology  edit  The word robotics was derived from the word robot , which was introduced to the public by Czech writer Karel apek in his play R.U.R. Rossums Universal Robots , which was published in 1920. 4  The word robot comes from the Slavic word robota , which means labourwork. The play begins in a factory that makes artificial people called robots , creatures who can be mistaken for humans  very similar to the modern ideas of androids . Karel apek himself did not coin the word. He wrote a short letter in reference to an etymology in the Oxford English Dictionary in which he named his brother Josef apek as its actual originator. 4  According to the Oxford English Dictionary , the word robotics was first used in print by Isaac Asimov , in his science fiction short story Liar , published in May 1941 in Astounding Science Fiction . Asimov was unaware that he was coining the term since the science and technology of electrical devices is electronics , he assumed robotics already referred to the science and technology of robots. In some of Asimovs other works, he states that the first use of the word robotics was in his short story Runaround  Astounding Science Fiction , March 1942, 5  6  where he introduced his concept of The Three Laws of Robotics . However, the original publication of Liar predates that of Runaround by ten months, so the former is generally cited as the words origin. History  edit  See also History of robots In 1948, Norbert Wiener formulated the principles of cybernetics , the basis of practical robotics. Fully autonomous only appeared in the second half of the 20th century. The first digitally operated and programmable robot, the Unimate , was installed in 1961 to lift hot pieces of metal from a die casting machine and stack them. Commercial and industrial robots are widespread today and used to perform jobs more cheaply, more accurately and more reliably, than humans. They are also employed in some jobs which are too dirty, dangerous, or dull to be suitable for humans. Robots are widely used in manufacturing , assembly, packing and packaging, mining, transport, earth and space exploration , surgery, weaponry, laboratory research , safety, and the mass production of consumer and industrial goods . 7  Date Significance Robot name Inventor Third century B.C. and earlier One of the earliest descriptions of automata appears in the Lie Zi text, on a much earlier encounter between King Mu of Zhou 1023957 BC and a mechanical engineer known as Yan Shi, an artificer. The latter allegedly presented the king with a life-size, human-shaped figure of his mechanical handiwork. 8  Yan Shi Chinese    First century A.D. and earlier Descriptions of more than 100 machines and automata, including a fire engine, a wind organ, a coin-operated machine, and a steam-powered engine, in Pneumatica and Automata by Heron of Alexandria Ctesibius , Philo of Byzantium , Heron of Alexandria, and others c. 420 B.C A wooden, steam propelled bird, which was able to fly Flying pigeon Archytas of Tarentum 1206 Created early humanoid automata, programmable automaton band 9  Robot band, hand-washing automaton, 10  automated moving peacocks 11  Al-Jazari 1495 Designs for a humanoid robot Mechanical Knight Leonardo da Vinci 1738 Mechanical duck that was able to eat, flap its wings, and excrete Digesting Duck Jacques de Vaucanson 1898 Nikola Tesla demonstrates first radio-controlled vessel. Teleautomaton Nikola Tesla 1921 First fictional automatons called robots appear in the play R.U.R. Rossums Universal Robots Karel apek 1930s Humanoid robot exhibited at the 1939 and 1940 Worlds Fairs Elektro Westinghouse Electric Corporation 1946 First general-purpose digital computer Whirlwind Multiple people 1948 Simple robots exhibiting biological behaviors 12  Elsie and Elmer William Grey Walter 1956 First commercial robot, from the Unimation company founded by George Devol and Joseph Engelberger , based on Devols patents 13  Unimate George Devol 1961 First installed industrial robot. Unimate George Devol 1967 to 1972 First full-scale humanoid intelligent robot, 14  15  and first android . Its limb control system allowed it to walk with the lower limbs, and to grip and transport objects with hands, using tactile sensors. Its vision system allowed it to measure distances and directions to objects using external receptors, artificial eyes and ears. And its conversation system allowed it to communicate with a person in Japanese, with an artificial mouth. 16  17  18  WABOT-1 Waseda University 1973 First industrial robot with six electromechanically driven axes 19  20  Famulus KUKA Robot Group 1974 The worlds first microcomputer controlled electric industrial robot, IRB 6 from ASEA, was delivered to a small mechanical engineering company in southern Sweden. The design of this robot had been patented already 1972. IRB 6 ABB Robot Group 1975 Programmable universal manipulation arm, a Unimation product PUMA Victor Scheinman 1978 First object-level robot programming language, allowing robots to handle variations in object position, shape, and sensor noise. Freddy I and II, RAPT robot programming language Patricia Ambler and Robin Popplestone Robotic aspects  edit  Mechanical construction Electrical aspect A level of programming There are many types of robots they are used in many different environments and for many different uses, although being very diverse in application and form they all share three basic similarities when it comes to their construction Robots all have some kind of mechanical construction, a frame, form or shape designed to achieve a particular task. For example, a robot designed to travel across heavy dirt or mud, might use caterpillar tracks . The mechanical aspect is mostly the creators solution to completing the assigned task and dealing with the physics of the environment around it. Form follows function. Robots have electrical components which power and control the machinery. For example, the robot with caterpillar tracks would need some kind of power to move the tracker treads. That power comes in the form of electricity, which will have to travel through a wire and originate from a battery, a basic electrical circuit . Even petrol powered machines that get their power mainly from petrol still require an electric current to start the combustion process which is why most petrol powered machines like cars, have batteries. The electrical aspect of robots is used for movement through motors, sensing where electrical signals are used to measure things like heat, sound, position, and energy status and operation robots nee d some level of electrical energy supplied to their motors and sensors in order to activate and perform basic operations All robots contain some level of computer programming code. A program is how a robot decides when or how to do something. In the caterpillar track example, a robot that needs to move across a muddy road may have the correct mechanical construction and receive the correct amount of power from its battery, but would not go anywhere without a program telling it to move. Programs are the core essence of a robot, it could have excelle nt mechanical and electrical construction, but if its program is poorly constructed its performance will be very poor or it may not perform at all. There are three different types of robotic programs remote control, artificial intelligence and hybrid. A robot with remote control programing has a preexisting set of commands that it will only perform if and when it receives a signal from a control source, typically a human being with a remote control. It is perhaps more appropriate to view devices controlled primarily by human commands as falling in the discipline of automation rather than robotics. Robots that use artificial intelligence interact with their environment on their own without a control source, and can determine reactions to objects and problems they encounter using their preexisting programming. Hybrid is a form of programming that incorporates both AI and RC functions. Applications  edit  As more and more robots are designed for specific tasks this method of classification becomes more relevant. For example, many robots are designed for assembly work, which may not be readily adaptable for other applications. They are termed as assembly robots. For seam welding, some suppliers provide complete welding systems with the robot i.e. the welding equipment along wi th other material handling facilities like turntables etc. as an integrated unit. Such an integrated robotic system is called a welding robot even though its discrete manipulator unit could be adapted to a variety of tasks. Some robots are specifically designed for heavy load manipulation, and are labelled as heavy duty robots. 21  Atlas Robot a humanoid robot designed to aid emergency services in search and rescue operations Current and potential applications include Military robots . Industrial robots . Robots are increasingly used in manufacturing since the 1960s. According to the Robotic Industries Association US data, in 2016 automotive industry was the main customer of industrial robots with 52 of total sales. 22  In the auto industry, they can amount for more than half of the labor. There are even  lights off  factories such as an IBM keyboard manufacturing factory in Texas that was fully automated as early as 2003. 23  Cobots collaborative robots. 24  Construction robots. Construction robots can be separated into three types traditional robots, robotic arm , and robotic exoskeleton . 25  Agricultural robots AgRobots. 26  The use of robots in agriculture is closely linked to the concept of AI -assisted precision agriculture and drone usage. 27  1996-1998 research also proved that robots can perform a herding task. 28  Medical robots of various types such as da Vinci Surgical System and Hospi . Kitchen automation. Commercial examples of kitchen automation are Flippy burgers, Zume Pizza pizza, Cafe X coffee, Makr Shakr cocktails, Frobot frozen yogurts and Sally salads. 29  Home examples are Rotimatic  flatbreads baking 30  and Boris dishwasher loading. 31  Robot combat for sport  hobby or sport event where two or more robots fight in an arena to disable each other. This has developed from a hobby in the 1990s to several TV series worldwide. Cleanup of contaminated areas, such as toxic waste or nuclear facilities. 32  Domestic robots . Nanorobots . Swarm robotics . Autonomous drones . Sports field line marking . Components  edit  Power source  edit  Further information Power supply and Energy storage The InSight lander with solar panels deployed in a cleanroom At present, mostly leadacid batteries are used as a power source. Many different types of batteries can be used as a power source for robots. They range from leadacid batteries, which are safe and have relatively long shelf lives but are rather heavy compared to silvercadmium batteries that are much smaller in volume and are currently much more expensive. Designing a battery-powered robot needs to take into acco unt factors such as safety, cycle lifetime and weight . Generators, often some type of internal combustion engine , can also be used. However, such designs are often mechanically complex and need a fuel, require heat dissipation and are relatively heavy. A tether connecting the robot to a power supply would remove the power supply from the robot entirely. This has the advantage of saving weight and space by moving all power generation and storage components elsewhere. However, this design does come with the drawback of constantly having a cable connected to the robot, which can be difficult to manage. 33  Potential power sources could be pneumatic compressed gases Solar power using the suns energy and converting it into electrical power hydraulics liquids flywheel energy storage organic garbage through anaerobic digestion  nuclear Actuation  edit  Main article Actuator A robotic leg powered by air muscles Actuators are the  muscles  of a robot, the parts which convert stored energy into movement. 34  By far the most popular actuators are electric motors that rotate a wheel or gear, and linear actuators that control industrial robots in factories. There are some recent advances in alternative types of actuators, powered by electricity, chemicals, or compressed air. Electric motors  edit  Main article Electric motor The vast majority of robots use electric motors, often brushed and brushless DC motors in portable robots or AC motors in industrial robots and CNC machines. These motors are often preferred in systems with lighter loads, and where the predominant form of motion is rotational. Linear actuators  edit  Main article Linear actuator Various types of linear actuators move in and out instead of by spinning, and often have quicker direction changes, particularly when very large forces are needed such as with industrial robotics. They are typically powered by compressed and oxidized air  pneumatic actuator  or an oil  hydraulic actuator . Series elastic actuators  edit  A flexure is designed as part of the motor actuator, to improve safety and provide robust force control, energy efficiency, shock absorption mechanical filtering while reducing excessive wear on the transmission and other mechanical components. The resultant lower reflected inertia can improve safety when a robot is interacting with humans or during collisions. It has been us ed in various robots, particularly advanced manufacturing robots 35  and walking humanoid robots. 36  37  Air muscles  edit  Main article Pneumatic artificial muscles Pneumatic artificial muscles, also known as air muscles, are special tubes that expandtypically up to 40 when air is forced inside them. They are used in some robot applications. 38  39  40  Muscle wire  edit  Main article Shape memory alloy Muscle wire, also known as shape memory alloy, Nitinol or Flexinol wire, is a material which contracts under 5 when electricity is applied. They have been used for some small robot applications. 41  42  Electroactive polymers  edit  Main article Electroactive polymers EAPs or EPAMs are a plastic material that can contract substantially up to 380 activation strain from electricity, and have been used in facial muscles and arms of humanoid robots, 43  and to enable new robots to float, 44  fly, swim or walk. 45  Piezo motors  edit  Main article Piezoelectric motor Recent alternatives to DC motors are piezo motors or ultrasonic motors . These work on a fundamentally different principle, whereby tiny piezoceramic elements, vibrating many thousands of times per second, cause linear or rotary motion. There are different mechanisms of operation one type uses the vibration of the piezo elements to step the motor in a circle or a straight line. 46  Another type uses the piezo elements to cause a nut to vibrate or to drive a screw. The advantages of these motors are nanometer resolution, speed, and available force for their size. 47  These motors are already available commercially, and being used on some robots. 48  49  Elastic nanotubes  edit  Further information Carbon nanotube Elastic nanotubes are a promising artificial muscle technology in early-stage experimental development. The absence of defects in carbon nanotubes enables these filaments to deform elastically by several percent, with energy storage levels of perhaps 10   J cm 3 for metal nanotubes. Human biceps could be replaced with an 8  mm diameter wire of this material. Such compact muscle might allow future robots to outrun and outjump humans. 50  Sensing  edit  Main articles Robotic sensing and Robotic sensors Sensors allow robots to receive information about a certain measurement of the environment, or internal components. This is essential for robots to perform their tasks, and act upon any changes in the environment to calculate the appropriate response. They are used for various forms of measurements, to give the robots warnings about safety or malfunctions, and to provide real-t ime information of the task it is performing. Touch  edit  Main article Tactile sensor Current robotic and prosthetic hands receive far less tactile information than the human hand. Recent research has developed a tactile sensor array that mimics the mechanical properties and touch receptors of human fingertips. 51  52  The sensor array is constructed as a rigid core surrounded by conductive fluid contained by an elastomeric skin. Electrodes are mounted on the surface of the rigid core and are connected to an impedance-measuring device within the core. When the artificial skin touches an object the fluid path around the electrodes is deformed, producing impedance changes that map the forces r eceived from the object. The researchers expect that an important function of such artificial fingertips will be adjusting robotic grip on held objects. Scientists from several European countries and Israel developed a prosthetic hand in 2009, called SmartHand, which functions like a real oneallowing patients to write with it, type on a keyboard , play piano and perform other fine movements. The prosthesis has sensors which enable the patient to sense real feeling in its fingertips. 53  Vision  edit  Main article Computer vision See also Vision processing unit Computer vision is the science and technology of machines that see. As a scientific discipline, computer vision is concerned with the theory behind artificial systems that extract information from images. The image data can take many forms, such as video sequences and views from cameras. In most practical computer vision applications, the computers are pre-programmed to solve a particular task, but methods based on learning are now becoming increasingly common. Computer vision systems rely on image sensors which detect electromagnetic radiation which is typically in the form of either visible light or infra-red light . The sensors are designed using solid-state physics . The process by which light propagates and reflects off surfaces is explained using optics . Sophisticated image sensors even require quantum mechanics to provide a complete understanding of the image formation process. Robots can also be equipped with multiple vision sensors to be better able to compute the sense of depth in the environment. Like human eyes, robots eyes must also be able to focus on a particular area of interest, and also adjust to variations in light intensities. There is a subfield within computer vision where artificial systems are designed to mimic the processing and behavior of biological system , at different levels of complexity. Also, some of the learning-based methods developed within computer vision have their background in biology. Other  edit  Other common forms of sensing in robotics use lidar , radar , and sonar . 54  Manipulation  edit  KUKA industrial robot operating in a foundry Puma, one of the first industrial robots Baxter, a modern and versatile industrial robot developed by Rodney Brooks Further information Mobile manipulator Robots need to manipulate objects pick up, modify, destroy, or otherwise have an effect. Thus the hands of a robot are often referred to as end effectors , 55  while the arm is referred to as a manipulator . 56  Most robot arms have replaceable effectors, each allowing them to perform some small range of tasks. Some have a fixed manipulator which cannot be replaced, while a few have one very general purpose manipulator, for example, a humanoid hand. 57  Learning how to manipulate a robot often requires a close feedback between human to the robot, although there are several methods for remote manipulation of robots. 58  Mechanical grippers  edit  One of the most common effectors is the gripper. In its simplest manifestation, it consists of just two fingers which can open and close to pick up and let go of a range of small objects. Fingers can for example, be made of a chain with a metal wire run through it. 59  Hands that resemble and work more like a human hand include the Shadow Hand and the Robonaut hand. 60  Hands that are of a mid-level complexity include the Delft hand. 61  62  Mechanical grippers can come in various types, including friction and encompassing jaws. Friction jaws use all the force of the gripper to hold the object in place using friction. Encompassing jaws cradle the object in place, using less friction. Vacuum grippers  edit  Vacuum grippers are very simple astrictive 63  devices that can hold very large loads provided the prehension surface is smooth enough to ensure suction. Pick and place robots for electronic components and for large objects like car windscreens, often use very simple vacuum grippers. General purpose effectors  edit  Some advanced robots are beginning to use fully humanoid hands, like the Shadow Hand, MANUS, 64  and the Schunk hand. 65  These are highly dexterous manipulators, with as many as 20 degrees of freedom and hundreds of tactile sensors. 66  Locomotion  edit  Main articles Robot locomotion and Mobile robot Rolling robots  edit  Segway in the Robot museum in Nagoya For simplicity, most mobile robots have four wheels or a number of continuous tracks . Some researchers have tried to create more complex wheeled robots with only one or two wheels. These can have certain advantages such as greater efficiency and reduced parts, as well as allowing a robot to navigate in confined places that a four-wheeled robot would not be able to. Two-wheeled balancing robots  edit  Balancing robots generally use a gyroscope to detect how much a robot is falling and then drive the wheels proportionally in the same direction, to counterbalance the fall at hundreds of times per second, based on the dynamics of an inverted pendulum . 67  Many different balancing robots have been designed. 68  While the Segway is not commonly thought of as a robot, it can be thought of as a component of a robot, when used as such Segway refer to them as RMP Robotic Mobility Platform. An example of this use has been as NASA s Robonaut that has been mounted on a Segway. 69  One-wheeled balancing robots  edit  Main article Self-balancing unicycle A one-wheeled balancing robot is an extension of a two-wheeled balancing robot so that it can move in any 2D direction using a round ball as its only wheel. Several one-wheeled balancing robots have been designed recently, such as Carnegie Mellon University s  Ballbot  that is the approximate height and width of a person, and Tohoku Gakuin University s BallIP. 70  Because of the long, thin shape and ability to maneuver in tight spaces, they have the potential to function better than other robots in environments with people. 71  Spherical orb robots  edit  Main article Spherical robot Several attempts have been made in robots that are completely inside a spherical ball, either by spinning a weight inside the ball, 72  73  or by rotating the outer shells of the sphere. 74  75  These have also been referred to as an orb bot 76  or a ball bot. 77  78  Six-wheeled robots  edit  Using six wheels instead of four wheels can give better traction or grip in outdoor terrain such as on rocky dirt or grass. Tracked robots  edit  TALON military robots used by the United States Army Tank tracks provide even more traction than a six-wheeled robot. Tracked wheels behave as if they were made of hundreds of wheels, therefore are very common for outdoor and military robots, where the robot must drive on very rough terrain. However, they are difficult to use indoors such as on carpets and smooth floors. Examples include NASAs Urban Robot Urbie. 79  Walking applied to robots  edit  Walking is a difficult and dynamic problem to solve. Several robots have been made which can walk reliably on two legs, however, none have yet been made which are as robust as a human. There has been much study on human inspired walking, such as AMBER lab which was established in 2008 by the Mechanical Engineering Department at Texas A M University. 80  Many other robots have been built that walk on more than two legs, due to these robots being significantly easier to construct. 81  82  Walking robots can be used for uneven terrains, which would provide better mobility and energy efficiency than other locomotion methods. Typically, robots on two legs can walk well on flat floors and can occasionally walk up stairs . None can walk over rocky, uneven terrain. Some of the methods which have been tried are ZMP technique  edit  Main article Zero moment point The zero moment point ZMP is the algorithm used by robots such as Honda s ASIMO . The robots onboard computer tries to keep the total inertial forces the combination of Earth s gravity and the acceleration and deceleration of walking, exactly opposed by the floor reaction force the force of the floor pushing back on the robots foot. In this way, the two forces cancel out, leaving no moment force causing the robot to rotate and fall over. 83  However, this is not exactly how a human walks, and the difference is obvious to human observers, some of whom have pointed out that ASIMO walks as if it needs the lavatory . 84  85  86  ASIMOs walking algorithm is not static, and some dynamic balancing is used see below. However, it still requires a smooth surface to walk on. Hopping  edit  Several robots, built in the 1980s by Marc Raibert at the MIT Leg Laboratory, successfully demonstrated very dynamic walking. Initially, a robot with only one leg, and a very small foot could stay upright simply by hopping . The movement is the same as that of a person on a pogo stick . As the robot falls to one side, it would jump slightly in that direction, in order to catch itself. 87  Soon, the algorithm was generalised to two and four legs. A bipedal robot was demonstrated running and even performing somersaults . 88  A quadruped was also demonstrated which could trot , run, pace , and bound. 89  For a full list of these robots, see the MIT Leg Lab Robots page. 90  Dynamic balancing controlled falling  edit  A more advanced way for a robot to walk is by using a dynamic balancing algorithm, which is potentially more robust than the Zero Moment Point technique, as it constantly monitors the robots motion, and places the feet in order to maintain stability. 91  This technique was recently demonstrated by Anybots Dexter Robot, 92  which is so stable, it can even jump. 93  Another example is the TU Delft Flame . Passive dynamics  edit  Main article Passive dynamics Perhaps the most promising approach utilizes passive dynamics where the momentum of swinging limbs is used for greater efficiency . It has been shown that totally unpowered humanoid mechanisms can walk down a gentle slope, using only gravity to propel themselves. Using this technique, a robot need only supply a small amount of motor power to walk along a flat surface or a little more to walk up a hill . This technique promises to make walking robots at least ten times more efficient than ZMP walkers, like ASIMO. 94  95  Other methods of locomotion  edit  Flying  edit  Two robot snakes. Left one has 64 motors with 2 degrees of freedom per segment, the right one 10. A modern passenger airliner is essentially a flying robot, with two humans to manage it. The autopilot can control the plane for each stage of the journey, including takeoff, normal flight, and even landing. 96  Other flying robots are uninhabited and are known as unmanned aerial vehicles UAVs. They can be smaller and lighter without a human pilot on board, and fly into dangerous territory for military surveillance missions. Some can even fire on targets under command. UAVs are also being developed which can fire on targets automatically, without the need for a command from a human. Other flying robots include cruise missiles , the Entomopter, and the Epson micro helicopter robot . Robots such as the Air Penguin, Air Ray, and Air Jelly have lighter-than-air bodies, propelled by paddles, and guided by sonar. Snaking  edit  Several snake robots have been successfully developed. Mimicking the way real snakes move, these robots can navigate very confined spaces, meaning they may one day be used to search for people trapped in collapsed buildings. 97  The Japanese ACM-R5 snake robot 98  can even navigate both on land and in water. 99  Skating  edit  A small number of skating robots have been developed, one of which is a multi-mode walking and skating device. It has four legs, with unpowered wheels, which can either step or roll. 100  Another robot, Plen, can use a miniature skateboard or roller-skates, and skate across a desktop. 101  Capuchin, a climbing robot Climbing  edit  Several different approaches have been used to develop robots that have the ability to climb vertical surfaces. One approach mimics the movements of a human climber on a wall with protrusions adjusting the center of mass and moving each limb in turn to gain leverage. An example of this is Capuchin, 102  built by Dr. Ruixiang Zhang at Stanford University, California. Another approach uses the specialized toe pad method of wall-climbing geckoes , which can run on smooth surfaces such as vertical glass. Examples of this approach include Wallbot 103  and Stickybot. 104  Chinas Technology Daily reported on November 15, 2008, that Dr. Li Hiu Yeung and his research group of New Concept Aircraft  Zhuhai  Co., Ltd. had successfully developed a bionic gecko robot named  Speedy Freelander . According to Dr. Li, the gecko robot could rapidly climb up and down a variety of building walls, navigate through ground and wall fissures, and walk upside-down on the ceiling. It was also able to adapt to the surfaces of smooth glass, rough, sticky or dusty walls as well as various types of metallic materials. It could also identify and circumvent obstacles automatically. Its flexibility and speed were comparable to a natural gecko. A third approach is to mimic the motion of a snake climbing a pole. 105  Swimming Piscine  edit  It is calculated that when swimming some fish can achieve a propulsive efficiency greater than 90. 106  Furthermore, they can accelerate and maneuver far better than any man-made boat or submarine , and produce less noise and water disturbance. Therefore, many researchers studying underwater robots would like to copy this type of locomotion. 107  Notable examples are the Essex University Computer Science Robotic Fish G9, 108  and the Robot Tuna built by the Institute of Field Robotics, to analyze and mathematically model thunniform motion . 109  The Aqua Penguin, 110  designed and built by Festo of Germany, copies the streamlined shape and propulsion by front flippers of penguins . Festo have also built the Aqua Ray and Aqua Jelly, which emulate the locomotion of manta ray, and jellyfish, respectively. Robotic Fish iSplash -II In 2014 iSplash -II was developed by PhD student Richard James Clapham and Prof. Huosheng Hu at Essex University. It was the first robotic fish capable of outperforming real carangiform fish in terms of average maximum velocity measured in body lengths second and endurance, the duration that top speed is maintained. 111  This build attained swimming speeds of 11.6BLs i.e. 3.7  ms. 112  The first build, iSplash -I 2014 was the first robotic platform to apply a full-body length carangiform swimming motion which was found to increase swimming speed by 27 over the traditional approach of a posterior confined waveform. 113  Sailing  edit  The autonomous sailboat robot Vaimos Sailboat robots have also been developed in order to make measurements at the surface of the ocean. A typical sailboat robot is Vaimos 114  built by IFREMER and ENSTA-Bretagne. Since the propulsion of sailboat robots uses the wind, the energy of the batteries is only used for the computer, for the communication and for the actuators to tune the rudder and the sail. If the robot is equipped with solar panels, the robot could theoretically navigate forever. The two main competitions of sailboat robots are WRSC , which takes place every year in Europe, and Sailbot . Environmental interaction and navigation  edit  Main articles Robotic mapping and Robotic navigation Radar, GPS , and lidar , are all combined to provide proper navigation and obstacle avoidance vehicle developed for 2007 DARPA Urban Challenge  This section does not cite any sources . Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .  July 2009   Learn how and when to remove this template message  Though a significant percentage of robots in commission today are either human controlled or operate in a static environment, there is an increasing interest in robots that can operate autonomously in a dynamic environment. These robots require some combination of navigation hardware and software in order to traverse their environment. In particular, unforeseen events e.g. people and other obstacles that are not stationary can cause problems or collisions. Some highly advanced robots such as ASIMO and Mein robot have particularly good robot navigation hardware and software. Also, self-controlled cars , Ernst Dickmanns  driverless car , and the entries in the DARPA Grand Challenge , are capable of sensing the environment well and subsequently making navigational decisions based on this information. Most of these robots employ a GPS navigation device with waypoints, along with radar , sometimes combined with other sensory data such as lidar , video cameras , and inertial guidance systems for better navigation between waypoints. Human-robot interaction  edit  Main article Human-robot interaction Kismet can produce a range of facial expressions. The state of the art in sensory intelligence for robots will have to progress through several orders of magnitude if we want the robots working in our homes to go beyond vacuum-cleaning the floors. If robots are to work effectively in homes and other non-industrial environments, the way they are instructed to perform their jobs, and especially how they will be told to stop will be of critical importance. The people who interact with them may have little or no training in robotics, and so any interface will need to be extremely intuitive. Science fiction authors also typically assume that robots will eventually be capable of communicating with humans through speech , gestures , and facial expressions , rather than a command-line interface . Although speech would be the most natural way for the human to communicate, it is unnatural for the robot. It will probably be a long time before robots interact as naturally as the fictional C-3PO , or Data of Star Trek, Next Generation . Speech recognition  edit  Main article Speech recognition Interpreting the continuous flow of sounds coming from a human, in real time , is a difficult task for a computer, mostly because of the great variability of speech . 115  The same word, spoken by the same person may sound different depending on local acoustics , volume , the previous word, whether or not the speaker has a cold , etc.. It becomes even harder when the speaker has a different accent . 116  Nevertheless, great strides have been made in the field since Davis, Biddulph, and Balashek designed the first voice input system which recognized ten digits spoken by a single user with 100 accuracy in 1952. 117  Currently, the best systems can recognize continuous, natural speech, up to 160 words per minute, with an accuracy of 95. 118  With the help of artificial intelligence, machines nowadays can use peoples voice to identify their emotions such as satisfied or angry 119  Robotic voice  edit  Other hurdles exist when allowing the robot to use voice for interacting with humans. For social reasons, synthetic voice proves suboptimal as a communication medium, 120  making it necessary to develop the emotional component of robotic voice through various techniques. 121  122  An advantage of diphonic branching is the emotion that the robot is programmed to project, can be carried on the voice tape, or phoneme, already pre-programmed onto the voice media. One of the earliest examples is a teaching robot named leachim developed in 1974 by Michael J. Freeman . 123  124  Leachim was able to convert digital memory to rudimentary verbal speech on pre-recorded computer discs. 125  It was programmed to teach students in The Bronx, New York . 125  Gestures  edit  Further information Gesture recognition One can imagine, in the future, explaining to a robot chef how to make a pastry, or asking directions from a robot police officer. In both of these cases, making hand gestures would aid the verbal descriptions. In the first case, the robot would be recognizing gestures made by the human, and perhaps repeating them for confirmation. In the second case, the robot police officer would gesture to indicate down the road, then turn right. It is likely that gestures will make up a part of the interaction between humans and robots. 126  A great many systems have been developed to recognize human hand gestures. 127  Facial expression  edit  Further information Emotion recognition Facial expressions can provide rapid feedback on the progress of a dialog between two humans, and soon may be able to do the same for humans and robots. Robotic faces have been constructed by Hanson Robotics using their elastic polymer called Frubber , allowing a large number of facial expressions due to the elasticity of the rubber facial coating and embedded subsurface motors  servos . 128  The coating and servos are built on a metal skull . A robot should know how to approach a human, judging by their facial expression and body language . Whether the person is happy, frightened, or crazy-looking affects the type of interaction expected of the robot. Likewise, robots like Kismet and the more recent addition, Nexi 129  can produce a range of facial expressions, allowing it to have meaningful social exchanges with humans. 130  Artificial emotions  edit  Artificial emotions can also be generated, composed of a sequence of facial expressions andor gestures. As can be seen from the movie Final Fantasy The Spirits Within , the programming of these artificial emotions is complex and requires a large amount of human observation. To simplify this programming in the movie, presets were created together with a special software program. This decreased the amount of time needed to make the film. These presets could possibly be transferred for use in real-life robots. Personality  edit  Many of the robots of science fiction have a personality , something which may or may not be desirable in the commercial robots of the future. 131  Nevertheless, researchers are trying to create robots which appear to have a personality 132  133  i.e. they use sounds, facial expressions, and body language to try to convey an internal state, which may be joy, sadness, or fear. One commercial example is Pleo , a toy robot dinosaur, which can exhibit several apparent emotions. 134  Social Intelligence  edit  The Socially Intelligent Machines Lab of the Georgia Institute of Technology researches new concepts of guided teaching interaction with robots. The aim of the projects is a social robot that learns task and goals from human demonstrations without prior knowledge of high-level concepts. These new concepts are grounded from low-level continuous sensor data through unsupervised learning , and task goals are subsequently learned using a Bayesian approach. These concepts can be used to transfer knowledge to future tasks, resulting in faster learning of those tasks. The results are demonstrated by the robot Curi who can scoop some pasta from a pot onto a plate and serve the sauce on top. 135  Control  edit  Puppet Magnus , a robot-manipulated marionette with complex control systems. RuBot II can manually resolve Rubiks cubes. Further information Control system This section does not cite any sources . Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .  July 2009   Learn how and when to remove this template message  The mechanical structure of a robot must be controlled to perform tasks. The control of a robot involves three distinct phases  perception, processing, and action  robotic paradigms . Sensors give information about the environment or the robot itself e.g. the position of its joints or its end effector. This information is then processed to be stored or transmitted and to calculate the appropriate signals to the actuators  motors  which move the mechanical. The processing phase can range in complexity. At a reactive level, it may translate raw sensor information directly into actuator commands. Sensor fusion may first be used to estimate parameters of interest e.g. the position of the robots gripper from noisy sensor data. An immediate task such as moving the gripper in a certain direction is inferred from these estimates. Techniques from control theory convert the task into commands that drive the actuators. At longer time scales or with more sophisticated tasks, the robot may need to build and reason with a cognitive model. Cognitive models try to represent the robot, the world, and how they interact. Pattern recognition and computer vision can be used to track objects. Mapping techniques can be used to build maps of the world. Finally, motion planning and other artificial intelligence techniques may be used to figure out how to act. For example, a planner may figure out how to achieve a task without hitting obstacles, falling over, etc. Autonomy levels  edit  TOPIO , a humanoid robot , played ping pong at Tokyo IREX 2009. 136  Control systems may also have varying levels of autonomy. Direct interaction is used for haptic or teleoperated devices, and the human has nearly complete control over the robots motion. Operator-assist modes have the operator commanding medium-to-high-level tasks, with the robot automatically figuring out how to achieve them. An autonomous robot may go without human interaction for extended periods of time . Higher levels of autonomy do not necessarily require more complex cognitive capabilities. For example, robots in assembly plants are completely autonomous but operate in a fixed pattern. Another classification takes into account the interaction between human control and the machine motions. Teleoperation . A human controls each movement, each machine actuator change is specified by the operator. Supervisory. A human specifies general moves or position changes and the machine decides specific movements of its actuators. Task-level autonomy. The operator specifies only the task and the robot manages itself to complete it. Full autonomy. The machine will create and complete all its tasks without human interaction. Research  edit  Further information Open-source robotics , Evolutionary robotics , Areas of robotics , and Robotics simulator Two Jet Propulsion Laboratory engineers stand with three vehicles, providing a size comparison of three generations of Mars rovers. Front and center is the flight spare for the first Mars rover, Sojourner , which landed on Mars in 1997 as part of the Mars Pathfinder Project. On the left is a Mars Exploration Rover MER test vehicle that is a working sibling to Spirit and Opportunity , which landed on Mars in 2004. On the right is a test rover for the Mars Science Laboratory, which landed Curiosity on Mars in 2012. Sojourner is 65  cm 2.13  ft long. The Mars Exploration Rovers MER are 1.6  m 5.2  ft long. Curiosity on the right is 3  m 9.8  ft long. Much of the research in robotics focuses not on specific industrial tasks, but on investigations into new types of robots , alternative ways to think about or design robots, and new ways to manufacture them. Other investigations, such as MITs cyberflora project, are almost wholly academic. A first particular new innovation in robot design is the open sourcing of robot-projects. To describe the level of advancement of a robot, the term Generation Robots can be used. This term is coined by Professor Hans Moravec , Principal Research Scientist at the Carnegie Mellon University Robotics Institute in describing the near future evolution of robot technology. First generation robots, Moravec predicted in 1997, should have an intellectual capacity comparable to perhaps a lizard and should become available by 2010. Because the first generation robot would be incapable of learning , however, Moravec predicts that the second generation robot would be an improvement over the first and become available by 2020, with the intelligence maybe comparable to that of a mouse . The third generation robot should have the intelligence comparable to that of a monkey . Though fourth generation robots, robots with human intelligence, professor Moravec predicts, would become possible, he does not predict this happening before around 2040 or 2050. 137  The second is evolutionary robots . This is a methodology that uses evolutionary computation to help design robots, especially the body form, or motion and behavior controllers . In a similar way to natural evolution , a large population of robots is allowed to compete in some way, or their ability to perform a task is measured using a fitness function . Those that perform worst are removed from the population and replaced by a new set, which have new behaviors based on those of the winners. Over time the population improves, and eventually a satisfactory robot may appear. This happens without any direct programming of the robots by the researchers. Researchers use this method both to create better robots, 138  and to explore the nature of evolution. 139  Because the process often requires many generations of robots to be simulated, 140  this technique may be run entirely or mostly in simulation , using a robot simulator software package, then tested on real robots once the evolved algorithms are good enough. 141  Currently, there are about 10 million industrial robots toiling around the world, and Japan is the top country having high density of utilizing robots in its manufacturing industry.  citation needed  Dynamics and kinematics  edit  Further information Kinematics and Dynamics mechanics External video How the BB-8 Sphero Toy Works The study of motion can be divided into kinematics and dynamics . 142  Direct kinematics refers to the calculation of end effector position, orientation, velocity , and acceleration when the corresponding joint values are known. Inverse kinematics refers to the opposite case in which required joint values are calculated for given end effector values, as done in path planning. Some special aspects of kinematics include handling of redundancy different possibilities of performing the same movement, collision avoidance, and singularity avoidance. Once all relevant positions, velocities, and accelerations have been calculated using kinematics , methods from the field of dynamics are used to study the effect of forces upon these movements. Direct dynamics refers to the calculation of accelerations in the robot once the applied forces are known. Direct dynamics is used in computer simulations of the robot. Inverse dynamics refers to the calculation of the actuator forces necessary to create a prescribed end-effector acceleration. This information can be used to improve the control algorithms of a robot. In each area mentioned above, researchers strive to develop new concepts and strategies, improve existing ones, and improve the interaction between these areas. To do this, criteria for optimal performance and ways to optimize design, structure, and control of robots must be developed and implemented. Bionics and biomimetics  edit  Bionics and biomimetics apply the physiology and methods of locomotion of animals to the design of robots. For example, the design of BionicKangaroo was based on the way kangaroos jump. Quantum computing  edit  There has been some research into whether robotics algorithms can be run more quickly on quantum computers than they can be run on digital computers . This area has been referred to as quantum robotics. 143  Education and training  edit  Main article Educational robotics The SCORBOT-ER 4u educational robot Robotics engineers design robots, maintain them, develop new applications for them, and conduct research to expand the potential of robotics. 144  Robots have become a popular educational tool in some middle and high schools, particularly in parts of the USA , 145  as well as in numerous youth summer camps, raising interest in programming, artificial intelligence, and robotics among students. First-year computer science courses at some universities now include programming of a robot in addition to traditional software engineering-based coursework. 58  Career training  edit  Universities offer bachelors , masters , and doctoral degrees in the field of robotics. 146  Vocational schools offer robotics training aimed at careers in robotics. Certification  edit  The Robotics Certification Standards Alliance RCSA is an international robotics certification authority that confers various industry- and educational-related robotics certifications. Summer robotics camp  edit  Several national summer camp programs include robotics as part of their core curriculum. In addition, youth summer robotics programs are frequently offered by celebrated museums and institutions. Robotics competitions  edit  Main article Robot competition There are lots of competitions all around the globe. The SeaPerch curriculum is aimed as students of all ages. This is a short list of competition examples for a more complete list see Robot competition . Competitions for Younger Children  edit  The FIRST organization offers the FIRST Lego League Jr. competitions for younger children. This competitions goal is to offer younger children an opportunity to start learning about science and technology. Children in this competition build Lego models and have the option of using the Lego WeDo robotics kit. Competitions for Children Ages 9-14  edit  One of the most important competitions is the FLL or FIRST Lego League . The idea of this specific competition is that kids start developing knowledge and getting into robotics while playing with Lego since they are 9 years old. This competition is associated with National Instruments . Children use Lego Mindstorms to solve autonomous robotics challenges in this competition. Competitions for Teenagers  edit  Main article FIRST The FIRST Tech Challenge is designed for intermediate students, as a transition from the FIRST Lego League to the FIRST Robotics Competition . The FIRST Robotics Competition focuses more on mechanical design, with a specific game being played each year. Robots are built specifically for that years game. In match play, the robot moves autonomously during the first 15 seconds of the game although certain years such as 2019s Deep Space change this rule, and is manually operated for the rest of the match. Competitions for Older Students  edit  The various RoboCup competitions include teams of teenagers and university students. These competitions focus on soccer competitions with different types of robots, dance competitions, and urban search and rescue competitions. All of the robots in these competitions must be autonomous. Some of these competitions focus on simulated robots. AUVSI runs competitions for flying robots , robot boats , and underwater robots . The Student AUV Competition Europe 147  SAUC-E mainly attracts undergraduate and graduate student teams. As in the AUVSI competitions, the robots must be fully autonomous while they are participating in the competition. The Microtransat Challenge is a competition to sail a boat across the Atlantic Ocean. Competitions Open to Anyone  edit  RoboGames is open to anyone wishing to compete in their over 50 categories of robot competitions. Federation of International Robot-soccer Association holds the FIRA World Cup competitions. There are flying robot competitions, robot soccer competitions, and other challenges, including weightlifting barbells made from dowels and CDs. Robotics afterschool programs  edit  Many schools across the country are beginning to add robotics programs to their after school curriculum. Some major programs for afterschool robotics include FIRST Robotics Competition , Botball and B.E.S.T. Robotics. 148  Robotics competitions often include aspects of business and marketing as well as engineering and design. The Lego company began a program for children to learn and get excited about robotics at a young age. 149  Employment  edit  A robot technician builds small all-terrain robots. Courtesy MobileRobots Inc Main article Technological unemployment Robotics is an essential component in many modern manufacturing environments. As factories increase their use of robots, the number of roboticsrelated jobs grow and have been observed to be steadily rising. 150  The employment of robots in industries has increased productivity and efficiency savings and is typically seen as a long term investment for benefactors. A paper by Michael Osborne and   Carl Benedikt Frey  found that 47 per cent of US jobs are at risk to automation over some unspecified number of years. 151  These claims have been criticized on the ground that social policy, not AI, causes unemployment. 152  Occupational safety and health implications  edit  Main article Workplace robotics safety A discussion paper drawn up by EU-OSHA highlights how the spread of robotics presents both opportunities and challenges for occupational safety and health OSH. 153  The greatest OSH benefits stemming from the wider use of robotics should be substitution for people working in unhealthy or dangerous environments. In space, defence, security, or the nuclear industry, but also in logistics, maintenance, and inspection, autonomous robots are particularly useful in replacing human workers performing dirty, dull or unsafe tasks, thus avoiding wor kers exposures to hazardous agents and conditions and reducing physical, ergonomic and psychosocial risks. For example, robots are already used to perform repetitive and monotonous tasks, to handle radioactive material or to work in explosive atmospheres. In the future, many other highly repetitive, risky or unpleasant tasks will be performed by robots in a variety of sectors like agriculture, construction, transport, healthcare, firefighting or cleaning services. 154  Despite these advances, there are certain skills to which humans will be better suited than machines for some time to come and the question is how to achieve the best combination of human and robot skills. The advantages of robotics include heavy-duty jobs with precision and repeatability, whereas the advantages of humans include creativity, decision-making, flexibility and ada ptability. This need to combine optimal skills has resulted in collaborative robots and humans sharing a common workspace more closely and led to the development of new approaches and standards to guarantee the safety of the man-robot merger. Some European countries are including robotics in their national programmes and trying to promote a safe and flexible co-operation between robots and operators to achieve better productivity. For example, the German Fe deral Institute for Occupational Safety and Health  BAuA  organises annual workshops on the topic human-robot collaboration. In future, co-operation between robots and humans will be diversified, with robots increasing their autonomy and human-robot collaboration reaching completely new forms. Current approaches and technical standards 155  156  aiming to protect employees from the risk of working with collaborative robots will have to be revised. See also  edit  Artificial intelligence Autonomous robot Cloud robotics Cognitive robotics Evolutionary robotics Fog robotics Glossary of robotics Index of robotics articles Mechatronics Multi-agent system Outline of robotics Roboethics Robot rights Robotic governance Soft robotics References  edit   Nocks, Lisa 2007. The robot   the life story of a technology . Westport, CT Greenwood Publishing Group. .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Carne, Nick March 8, 2019. Researchers make a million tiny robots . Cosmos Magazine . Retrieved March 8, 2019 .  Arreguin, Juan 2008. Automation and Robotics . Vienna, Austria I-Tech and Publishing.  a b Zunt, Dominik. Who did actually invent the word robot and what does it mean . The Karel apek website. Archived from the original on 2013-01-23 . Retrieved 2017-02-05 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   Asimov, Isaac 1996 1995. The Robot Chronicles. Gold . London Voyager. pp.  224225. ISBN   978-0-00-648202-4 .  Asimov, Isaac 1983. 4 The Word I Invented. Counting the Eons . Doubleday. Bibcode  1983coeo.book.....A . Robotics has become a sufficiently well developed technology to warrant articles and books on its history and I have watched this in amazement, and in some disbelief, because I invented  the word  Robotics About the Exhibition . The Tech Museum of Innovation. Archived from the original on 2008-09-13 . Retrieved 2008-09-15 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Needham, Joseph 1991. Science and Civilisation in China Volume 2, History of Scientific Thought . Cambridge University Press. ISBN   978-0-521-05800-1 .  Fowler, Charles B. October 1967. The Museum of Music A History of Mechanical Instruments. Music Educators Journal . 54 2 4549. doi  10.23073391092 . JSTOR   3391092 .  Rosheim, Mark E. 1994. Robot Evolution The Development of Anthrobotics . Wiley-IEEE. pp.  910. ISBN   978-0-471-02622-8 .  al-Jazari Islamic artist , Encyclopdia Britannica .  PhD, Renato M.E. Sabbatini. Sabbatini, RME An Imitation of Life The First Robots .  Waurzyniak, Patrick 2006. Masters of Manufacturing Joseph F. Engelberger . Society of Manufacturing Engineers . 137 1. Archived from the original on 2011-11-09. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Humanoid History -WABOT- . www.humanoid.waseda.ac.jp .  Zeghloul, Sad Laribi, Med Amine Gazeau, Jean-Pierre 21 September 2015. Robotics and Mechatronics Proceedings of the 4th IFToMM International Symposium on Robotics and Mechatronics . Springer. ISBN   9783319223681  via Google Books.  Historical Android Projects . androidworld.com .  Robots From Science Fiction to Technological Revolution , page 130  Duffy, Vincent G. 19 April 2016. Handbook of Digital Human Modeling Research for Applied Ergonomics and Human Factors Engineering . CRC Press. ISBN   9781420063523  via Google Books.  KUKA Industrial Robot FAMULUS . Retrieved 2008-01-10 .  History of Industrial Robots PDF . Archived from the original PDF on 2012-12-24 . Retrieved 2012-10-27 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Hunt, V. Daniel 1985. Smart Robots . Smart Robots A Handbook of Intelligent Robotic Systems . Chapman and Hall. p.  141. ISBN   978-1-4613-2533-8 .  Robot density rises globally . Robotic Industries Association . February 8, 2018 . Retrieved December 3, 2018 .  Pinto, Jim October 1, 2003. Fully automated factories approach reality . Automation World . Retrieved December 3, 2018 .  Dragani, Rachelle November 8, 2018. Can a robot make you a superworker . Verizon Communications . Retrieved December 3, 2018 .  Pollock, Emily June 7, 2018. Construction Robotics Industry Set to Double by 2023 . engineering.com . Retrieved December 3, 2018 .  Grift, Tony E. 2004. Agricultural Robotics . University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign . Archived from the original on 2007-05-04 . Retrieved December 3, 2018 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Thomas, Jim November 1, 2017. How corporate giants are automating the farm . New Internationalist . Retrieved December 3, 2018 .  OUCL Robot Sheepdog Project . Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford . July 3, 2001 . Retrieved December 3, 2018 .  Kolodny, Lora July 4, 2017. Robots are coming to a burger joint near you . CNBC . Retrieved December 3, 2018 .  Corner, Stuart November 23, 2017. AI-driven robot makes perfect flatbread . iothub.com.au . Retrieved December 3, 2018 .  Eyre, Michael September 12, 2014.   Boris the robot can load up dishwasher . BBC News . Retrieved December 3, 2018 .  One database, developed by the United States Department of Energy contains information on almost 500 existing robotic technologies and can be found on the D D Knowledge Management Information Tool .  Dowling, Kevin. Power Sources for Small Robots PDF . Carnegie Mellon University . Retrieved 11 May 2012 .  Roozing, Wesley Li, Zhibin Tsagarakis, Nikos Caldwell, Darwin 2016. Design Optimisation and Control of Compliant Actuation Arrangements in Articulated Robots for Improved Energy Efficiency. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters . 1 2 11101117. doi  10.1109LRA.2016.2521926 .  Bi-directional series-parallel elastic actuator and overlap of the actuation layers Raphal Furnmont1, Glenn Mathijssen1,2, Tom Verstraten1, Dirk Lefeber1 and Bram Vanderborght1 Published 26 January 2016   2016 IOP Publishing Ltd  Pratt, Jerry E. Krupp, Benjamin T. 2004. Series Elastic Actuators for legged robots. Unmanned Ground Vehicle Technology VI . Unmanned Ground Vehicle Technology Vi . 5422 . pp.  135144. Bibcode  2004SPIE.5422..135P . CiteSeerX   10.1.1.107.349 . doi  10.111712.548000 .  Li, Zhibin Tsagarakis, Nikos Caldwell, Darwin 2013. Walking Pattern Generation for a Humanoid Robot with Compliant Joints . Autonomous Robots . 35 1 114.  www.imagesco.com, Images SI Inc -. Air Muscle actuators, going further, page 6 .  Air Muscles . Shadow Robot. Archived from the original on 2007-09-27. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Tondu, Bertrand 2012. Modelling of the McKibben artificial muscle A review. Journal of Intelligent Material Systems and Structures . 23 3 225253. doi  10.11771045389X11435435 .  TALKING ELECTRONICS Nitinol Page-1 . Talkingelectronics.com . Retrieved 2010-11-27 .  lf205, Hardware Building a Linux-controlled walking robot . Ibiblio.org. 2001-11-01 . Retrieved 2010-11-27 .  WW-EAP and Artificial Muscles . Eap.jpl.nasa.gov . Retrieved 2010-11-27 .  Empa  a117-2-eap . Empa.ch . Retrieved 2010-11-27 .  Electroactive Polymers EAP as Artificial Muscles EPAM for Robot Applications . Hizook . Retrieved 2010-11-27 .  Piezo LEGS  -09-26 .  Squiggle Motors Overview . Retrieved 2007-10-08 .  Nishibori et al. 2003. Robot Hand with Fingers Using Vibration-Type Ultrasonic Motors Driving Characteristics. Journal of Robotics and Mechatronics . 15 6 588595. doi  10.20965jrm.2003.p0588 .  Otake et al. 2001. Shape Design of Gel Robots made of Electroactive Polymer trolo Gel PDF . Retrieved 2007-10-16 . Cite journal requires journal  help   John D. Madden, 2007, science.1146351  Syntouch LLC BioTacR Biomimetic Tactile Sensor Array . Retrieved 2009-08-10 .  Wettels, N Santos, VJ Johansson, RS Loeb, Gerald E. et al. 2008. Biomimetic tactile sensor array. Advanced Robotics . 22 8 829849. doi  10.1163156855308X314533 .  What is The SmartHand . SmartHand Project . Retrieved 4 February 2011 .  Arreguin, Juan 2008. Automation and Robotics . Vienna, Austria I-Tech and Publishing.  What is a robotic end-effector . ATI Industrial Automation. 2007 . Retrieved 2007-10-16 .  Crane, Carl D. Joseph Duffy 1998. Kinematic Analysis of Robot Manipulators . Cambridge University Press. ISBN   978-0-521-57063-3 . Retrieved 2007-10-16 .  G.J. Monkman, S. Hesse, R. Steinmann  H. Schunk 2007. Robot Grippers . Berlin Wiley  a b I. Ben-Gal, Y. Bukchin, O. Goldstain 2007 2007. Remote learning for the manipulation and control of robotic cells PDF . European Journal of Engineering Education . 32 4 481494. CiteSeerX   10.1.1.75.1590 . doi  10.108003043790701337213 . CS1 maint multiple names authors list  link   Annotated Mythbusters Episode 78 Ninja Myths  Walking on Water, Catching a Sword, Catching an Arrow . Discovery Channels Mythbusters making mechanical gripper from chain and metal wire  Robonaut hand  Delft hand . TU Delft . Archived from the original on 2012-02-03 . Retrieved 2011-11-21 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   M C. TU Delft ontwikkelt goedkope, voorzichtige robothand .  astrictive definition  English definition dictionary  Reverso .  Tijsma, H. A. Liefhebber, F. Herder, J. L. 1 June 2005. Evaluation of new user interface features for the MANUS robot arm . 9th International Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics, 2005. ICORR 2005 . pp.  258263. doi  10.1109ICORR.2005.1501097 . ISBN   978-0-7803-9003-4  via IEEE Xplore.  Allcock, Andrew 2006. Anthropomorphic hand is almost human . Machinery. Archived from the original on 2007-09-28 . Retrieved 2007-10-17 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Welcome .  T.O.B.B . Mtoussaint.de . Retrieved 2010-11-27 .  nBot, a two wheel balancing robot . Geology.heroy.smu.edu . Retrieved 2010-11-27 .  ROBONAUT Activity Report . NASA . 2004. Archived from the original on 2007-08-20 . Retrieved 2007-10-20 .  IEEE Spectrum A Robot That Balances on a Ball . Spectrum.ieee.org. 2010-04-29 . Retrieved 2010-11-27 .  Carnegie Mellon Researchers Develop New Type of Mobile Robot That Balances and Moves on a Ball Instead of Legs or Wheels Press release. Carnegie Mellon. 2006-08-09. Archived from the original on 2007-06-09 . Retrieved 2007-10-20 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Spherical Robot Can Climb Over Obstacles . BotJunkie . Retrieved 2010-11-27 .  Rotundus . Rotundus.se . Retrieved 2010-11-27 .  OrbSwarm Gets A Brain . BotJunkie. 2007-07-11 . Retrieved 2010-11-27 .  Rolling Orbital Bluetooth Operated Thing . BotJunkie . Retrieved 2010-11-27 .  Swarm . Orbswarm.com . Retrieved 2010-11-27 .  The Ball Bot   JohnnytronicSun . Blogs.sun.com. Archived from the original on 2011-08-24 . Retrieved 2010-11-27 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Senior Design Projects  College of Engineering  Applied Science  University of Colorado at Boulder . Engineering.colorado.edu. 2008-04-30 . Retrieved 2010-11-27 .  JPL Robotics System Commercial Rovers .  AMBER Lab .  Micromagic Systems Robotics Lab .  AMRU-5 hexapod robot PDF .  Achieving Stable Walking . Honda Worldwide . Retrieved 2007-10-22 .  Funny Walk . Pooter Geek. 2004-12-28 . Retrieved 2007-10-22 .  ASIMOs Pimp Shuffle . Popular Science. 2007-01-09 . Retrieved 2007-10-22 .  The Temple of VTEC  Honda and Acura Enthusiasts Online Forums  Robot Shows Prime Minister How to Loosen Up   A drunk robot .  3D One-Leg Hopper 19831984 . MIT Leg Laboratory . Retrieved 2007-10-22 .  3D Biped 19891995 . MIT Leg Laboratory.  Quadruped 19841987 . MIT Leg Laboratory.  MIT Leg Lab Robots- Main .  About the robots . Anybots. Archived from the original on 2007-09-09 . Retrieved 2007-10-23 .  Homepage . Anybots . Retrieved 2007-10-23 .  Dexter Jumps video . YouTube. 2007-03-01 . Retrieved 2007-10-23 .  Collins, Steve Wisse, Martijn Ruina, Andy Tedrake, Russ 2005-02-11. Efficient bipedal robots based on passive-dynamic Walkers PDF . Science . 307 5712 10821085. Bibcode  2005Sci...307.1082C . doi  10.1126science.1107799 . PMID   15718465 . Archived from the original PDF on 2007-06-22 . Retrieved 2007-09-11 .  Collins, Steve Ruina, Andy. A bipedal walking robot with efficient and human-like gait PDF . Proc. IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation .  Testing the Limits PDF . Boeing. p.  29 . Retrieved 2008-04-09 .  Miller, Gavin. Introduction . snakerobots.com . Retrieved 2007-10-22 .  ACM-R5 . Archived from the original on 2011-10-11. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Swimming snake robot commentary in Japanese .  Commercialized Quadruped Walking Vehicle TITAN VII   . Hirose Fukushima Robotics Lab. Archived from the original on 2007-11-06 . Retrieved 2007-10-23 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Plen, the robot that skates across your desk . SCI FI Tech. 2007-01-23. Archived from the original on 2007-10-11 . Retrieved 2007-10-23 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Capuchin on YouTube  Wallbot on YouTube  Stanford University Stickybot on YouTube  Arreguin, Juan 2008. Automation and Robotics . Vienna, Austria I-Tech and Publishing.  Sfakiotakis et al. 1999. Review of Fish Swimming Modes for Aquatic Locomotion PDF . IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering . 24 2 237252. Bibcode  1999IJOE...24..237S . doi  10.110948.757275 . Archived from the original PDF on 2007-09-26 . Retrieved 2007-10-24 .  Richard Mason. What is the market for robot fish . Archived from the original on 2009-07-04. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Robotic fish powered by Gumstix PC and PIC . Human Centred Robotics Group at Essex University . Retrieved 2007-10-25 .  Witoon Juwarahawong. Fish Robot . Institute of Field Robotics. Archived from the original on 2007-11-04 . Retrieved 2007-10-25 .  YouTube .  High-Speed Robotic Fish  iSplash . isplash-robot . Retrieved 2017-01-07 .  iSplash-II Realizing Fast Carangiform Swimming to Outperform a Real Fish PDF . Robotics Group at Essex University . Retrieved 2015-09-29 .  iSplash-I High Performance Swimming Motion of a Carangiform Robotic Fish with Full-Body Coordination PDF . Robotics Group at Essex University . Retrieved 2015-09-29 .  Jaulin, L. Le Bars, F. 2012. An interval approach for stability analysis Application to sailboat robotics PDF . IEEE Transactions on Robotics . 27 5.  J. Norberto Pires, 2005. Robot-by-voice experiments on commanding an industrial robot using the human voice, Industrial Robot An International Journal , Vol. 32, Issue 6, pp. 505511, doi  10.110801439910510629244 . Available online and pdf  Survey of the State of the Art in Human Language Technology 1.2 Speech Recognition . Archived from the original on 2007-11-11. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Fournier, Randolph Scott., and B. June. Schmidt. Voice Input Technology Learning Style and Attitude Toward Its Use. Delta Pi Epsilon Journal 37 1995 1_12.  History of Speech  Voice Recognition and Transcription Software . Dragon Naturally Speaking . Retrieved 2007-10-27 .  Cheng Lin, Kuan Huang, TienChi Hung, Jason C. Yen, Neil Y. Ju Chen, Szu 2013-06-07. Chen, MuYen ed.. Facial emotion recognition towards affective computingbased learning. Library Hi Tech . 31 2 294307. doi  10.110807378831311329068 . ISSN   0737-8831 .  M.L. Walters, D.S. Syrdal, K.L. Koay, K. Dautenhahn, R. te Boekhorst, 2008. Human approach distances to a mechanical-looking robot with different robot voice styles . In Proceedings of the 17th IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Communication, 2008. RO-MAN 2008, Munich, 13 Aug. 2008, pp. 707712, doi  10.1109ROMAN.2008.4600750 . Available online and pdf Archived 2011-07-18 at the Wayback Machine  Sandra Pauletto, Tristan Bowles, 2010. Designing the emotional content of a robotic speech signal . In Proceedings of the 5th Audio Mostly Conference A Conference on Interaction with Sound, New York, ISBN   978-1-4503-0046-9 , doi  10.11451859799.1859804 . Available online  Tristan Bowles, Sandra Pauletto, 2010. Emotions in the Voice Humanising a Robotic Voice . In Proceedings of the 7th Sound and Music Computing Conference, Barcelona, Spain.  World of 2-XL Leachim . www.2xlrobot.com . Retrieved 2019-05-28 .  The Boston Globe from Boston, Massachusetts on June 23, 1974  132 . Newspapers.com . Retrieved 2019-05-28 .  a b cyberneticzoo.com - Page 135 of 194 - a history of cybernetic animals and early robots . cyberneticzoo.com . Retrieved 2019-05-28 .  Waldherr, Romero  Thrun 2000. A Gesture Based Interface for Human-Robot Interaction PDF . Kluwer Academic Publishers . Retrieved 2007-10-28 . Cite journal requires journal  help   Markus Kohler 2012. Vision Based Hand Gesture Recognition Systems . Applied Mechanics and Materials . University of Dortmund. 263-266 24222425. Bibcode  2012AMM...263.2422L . doi  10.4028www.scientific.netAMM.263-266.2422 . Archived from the original on 2012-07-11 . Retrieved 2007-10-28 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   Frubber facial expressions . Archived from the original on 2009-02-07. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Best Inventions of 2008  TIME . Time . 29 October 2008  via www.time.com.  Kismet Robot at MITs AI Lab Interacts With Humans . Sam Ogden. Archived from the original on 2007-10-12 . Retrieved 2007-10-28 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Park et al. 2005 Synthetic Personality in Robots and its Effect on Human-Robot Relationship PDF .  Robot Receptionist Dishes Directions and Attitude .  New Scientist A good robot has personality but not looks PDF . Archived from the original PDF on 2006-09-29. Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   Playtime with Pleo, your robotic dinosaur friend .  Jennifer Bogo October 31, 2014. Meet a woman who trains robots for a living .  A Ping-Pong-Playing Terminator . Popular Science.  NOVA conversation with Professor Moravec, October, 1997. NOVA Online  Sandhana, Lakshmi 2002-09-05. A Theory of Evolution, for Robots . Wired . Wired Magazine . Retrieved 2007-10-28 .  Experimental Evolution In Robots Probes The Emergence Of Biological Communication . Science Daily. 2007-02-24 . Retrieved 2007-10-28 .  lajpah, Leon 2008-12-15. Simulation in robotics. Mathematics and Computers in Simulation . 79 4 879897. doi  10.1016j.matcom.2008.02.017 .  News, Technology Research. Evolution trains robot teams TRN 051904 . www.trnmag.com .  Agarwal, P.K. Elements of Physics XI . Rastogi Publications. p.  2. ISBN   978-81-7133-911-2 .  Tandon, Prateek 2017. Quantum Robotics . Morgan  Claypool Publishers. ISBN   978-1627059138 .  Career Robotics Engineer . Princeton Review . 2012 . Retrieved 2012-01-27 .  Saad, Ashraf Kroutil, Ryan 2012. Hands-on Learning of Programming Concepts Using Robotics for Middle and High School Students . Proceedings of the 50th Annual Southeast Regional Conference of the Association for Computer Machinery. ACM. pp.  361362. doi  10.11452184512.2184605 .  Robotics Degree Programs at Worcester Polytechnic Institute . Worcester Polytechnic Institute . 2013 . Retrieved 2013-04-12 .  Student AUV Competition Europe .  B.E.S.T. Robotics .  LEGO Building  Robotics After School Programs . Retrieved 5 November 2014 .  Toy, Tommy June 29, 2011. Outlook for robotics and Automation for 2011 and beyond are excellent says expert . PBT Consulting . Retrieved 2012-01-27 .  Frey, Carl Benedikt Osborne, Michael A. 2017-01-01. The future of employment How susceptible are jobs to computerisation. Technological Forecasting and Social Change . 114  254280. CiteSeerX   10.1.1.395.416 . doi  10.1016j.techfore.2016.08.019 . ISSN   0040-1625 .  E McGaughey, Will Robots Automate Your Job Away Full Employment, Basic Income, and Economic Democracy 2018 SSRN, part 23 . DH Autor, Why Are There Still So Many Jobs The History and Future of Workplace Automation 2015 293 Journal of Economic Perspectives 3.  Focal Points Seminar on review articles in the future of work  Safety and health at work  EU-OSHA . osha.europa.eu . Retrieved 2016-04-19 .  Robotics Redefining crime prevention, public safety and security . SourceSecurity.com.  Draft Standard for Intelligent Assist Devices  Personnel Safety Requirements PDF .  ISOTS 150662016  Robots and robotic devices  Collaborative robots . Further reading  edit  R. Andrew Russell 1990. Robot Tactile Sensing . New York Prentice Hall. ISBN   978-0-13-781592-0 . E McGaughey, Will Robots Automate Your Job Away Full Employment, Basic Income, and Economic Democracy 2018 SSRN, part 23 DH Autor, Why Are There Still So Many Jobs The History and Future of Workplace Automation 2015 293 Journal of Economic Perspectives 3 Tooze, Adam , Democracy and Its Discontents, The New York Review of Books , vol. LXVI, no. 10 6 June 2019, pp. 5253, 5657. Democracy has no clear answer for the mindless operation of bureaucratic and technological power . We may indeed be witnessing its extension in the form of artificial intelligence and robotics . Likewise, after decades of dire warning, the environmental problem remains fundamentally unaddressed.... Bureaucratic overreach and environmental catastrophe are precisely the kinds of slow-moving existential challenges that democracies deal with very badly.... Finally, there is the threat du jour corporations and the technologies they promote. pp. 5657. External links  edit  Robotics at Wikipedias sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Wikimedia Commons Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Robotics at Curlie IEEE Robotics and Automation Society Investigation of social robots  Robots that mimic human behaviors and gestures. Wireds guide to the 50 best robots ever, a mix of robots in fiction Hal, R2D2, K9 to real robots Roomba, Mobot, Aibo. v t e Robotics  outline  Main articles Outline Glossary Index History Future Geography Hall of Fame Ethics Laws Competitions AI competitions Types Anthropomorphic Humanoid Android Cyborg Claytronics Companion Animatronic Industrial Articulated arm Domestic Educational Entertainment Juggling Military Medical Service Disability Agricultural Food service Retailing BEAM robotics Soft robotics Uncrewed vehicle Classifications Biorobotics Aerial vehicle Ground vehicle Mobile robot navigation Microbotics Nanorobotics Robotic spacecraft Space probe Swarm Underwater Locomotion Tracks Walking Hexapod Climbing Self-balancing unicycle Research Evolutionary Kits Simulator Suite Open-source Software Adaptable Developmental Paradigms Ubiquitous Related Technological unemployment Fictional robots Category Outline v t e Emerging technologies Fields Agriculture Agricultural robot Cellular agriculture Closed ecological systems Cultured meat Genetically modified food Precision agriculture Vertical farming Architecture Arcology Building printing Contour crafting Domed city Biomedical Artificial uterus Ampakine Brain transplant Cryonics Cryoprotectant Cryopreservation Vitrification Suspended animation De-extinction Genetic engineering Gene therapy Head transplant Isolated brain Life extension Strategies for Engineered Negligible Senescence Nanomedicine Nanosensors Organ printing Personalized medicine Regenerative medicine Stem-cell therapy Tissue engineering Robot-assisted surgery Synthetic biology Synthetic genomics Virotherapy Oncolytic virus Tricorder Whole genome sequencing Displays Next generation FED FLCD iMoD Laser LPD OLED OLET QD-LED SED TPD TDEL TMOS MicroLED Screenless Bionic contact lens Head-mounted display Head-up display Optical head-mounted display Virtual retinal display Other Autostereoscopy Flexible display Holographic display Computer-generated holography Multi-primary color display Ultra HD Volumetric display Electronics Electronic nose E-textiles Flexible electronics Molecular electronics Nanoelectromechanical systems Memristor Spintronics Thermal copper pillar bump Twistronics Energy Production Airborne wind turbine Artificial photosynthesis Biofuels Carbon-neutral fuel Concentrated solar power Fusion power Home fuel cell Hydrogen economy Methanol economy Molten salt reactor Nantenna Photovoltaic pavement Space-based solar power Vortex engine Storage Beltway battery Compressed air energy storage Flywheel energy storage Grid energy storage Lithiumair battery Molten-salt battery Nanowire battery Research in lithium-ion batteries Siliconair battery Thermal energy storage Ultracapacitor Other Smart grid Wireless power Information and communications Ambient intelligence Internet of things Artificial intelligence Applications of artificial intelligence Progress in artificial intelligence Machine translation Mobile translation Machine vision Semantic Web Speech recognition Atomtronics Carbon nanotube field-effect transistor Cybermethodology Fourth-generation optical discs 3D optical data storage Holographic data storage GPGPU Memory CBRAM FRAM Millipede MRAM NRAM PRAM Racetrack memory RRAM SONOS Optical computing RFID Chipless RFID Software-defined radio Three-dimensional integrated circuit Manufacturing 3D printing Claytronics Molecular assembler Utility fog Materials science Aerogel Amorphous metal Artificial muscle Conductive polymer Femtotechnology Fullerene Graphene High-temperature superconductivity High-temperature superfluidity Linear acetylenic carbon Metamaterials Metamaterial cloaking Metal foam Multi-function structures Nanotechnology Carbon nanotubes Molecular nanotechnology Nanomaterials Picotechnology Programmable matter Quantum dots Silicene Superalloy Synthetic diamond Military Antimatter weapon Caseless ammunition Directed-energy weapon Laser Maser Particle-beam weapon Sonic weapon Coilgun Railgun Plasma weapon Pure fusion weapon Stealth technology Vortex ring gun Neuroscience Artificial brain Braincomputer interface Electroencephalography Mind uploading Brain-reading Neuroinformatics Neuroprosthetics Bionic eye Brain implant Exocortex Retinal implant Quantum Quantum algorithms Quantum amplifier Quantum bus Quantum channel Quantum circuit Quantum complexity theory Quantum computing Quantum cryptography Quantum dynamics Quantum electronics Quantum error correction Quantum imaging Quantum information Quantum key distribution Quantum logic Quantum logic gates Quantum machine Quantum machine learning Quantum metamaterial Quantum metrology Quantum network Quantum neural network Quantum optics Quantum programming Quantum sensing Quantum simulator Quantum teleportation Robotics Domotics Nanorobotics Powered exoskeleton Self-reconfiguring modular robot Swarm robotics Uncrewed vehicle Space science Launch Fusion rocket Non-rocket spacelaunch Mass driver Orbital ring Skyhook Space elevator Space fountain Space tether Reusable launch system Propulsion Beam-powered propulsion Ion thruster Laser propulsion Plasma propulsion engine Helicon thruster VASIMR Nuclear pulse propulsion Solar sail Other Interstellar travel Propellant depot Laser communication in space Transport Aerial Adaptive compliant wing Backpack helicopter Delivery drone Flying car High-altitude platform Jet pack Pulse detonation engine Scramjet Spaceplane Supersonic transport Land Airless tire Alternative fuel vehicle Hydrogen vehicle Driverless car Ground effect train Hyperloop Maglev train Personal rapid transit Transit Elevated Bus Vactrain Vehicular communication systems Pipeline Pneumatic transport Automated vacuum collection Other Anti-gravity Cloak of invisibility Digital scent technology Force field Plasma window Immersive virtual reality Magnetic refrigeration Phased-array optics Topics Collingridge dilemma Differential technological development Disruptive Innovation Ephemeralization Exploratory engineering Fictional technology Proactionary principle Technological change Technological unemployment Technological convergence Technological evolution Technological paradigm Technology forecasting Accelerating change Moores law Technological singularity Technology scouting Technology readiness level Technology roadmap Transhumanism Category List v t e Glossaries of science and engineering Aerospace engineering Archaeology Architecture Artificial intelligence Astronomy Biology Botany Calculus Chemistry Civil engineering Clinical research Computer science Ecology Economics Electrical and electronics engineering Engineering Entomology Environmental science Genetics Geography Geology Machine vision Mathematics Mechanical engineering Medicine Meteorology Physics Probability and statistics Psychiatry Robotics Speciation Structural engineering Authority control BNE  XX550609 BNF  cb11983019n data GND  4261462-4 LCCN  sh85114628 NARA  10644311 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleRobotics oldid914622376  Categories  Robotics Hidden categories CS1 errors deprecated parameters CS1 errors missing periodical CS1 maint multiple names authors list Webarchive template wayback links CS1 long volume value Articles with short description Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles needing additional references from July 2009 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2011 Articles with Curlie links Wikipedia articles with BNE identifiers Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers Wikipedia articles with NARA identifiers