Process optimization From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search This article includes a list of references , related reading or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations . Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.  December 2011   Learn how and when to remove this template message  Process optimization is the discipline of adjusting a process so as to optimize make the best or most effective use of some specified set of parameters without violating some constraint. The most common goals are minimizing cost and maximizing throughput andor efficiency. This is one of the major quantitative tools in industrial decision making . When optimizing a process, the goal is to maximize one or more of the process specifications, while keeping all others within their constraints. This can be done by using a process mining tool, discovering the critical activities and bottlenecks, and acting only on them. Areas  edit  Fundamentally, there are three parameters that can be adjusted to affect optimal performance. They are Equipment optimization The first step is to verify that the existing equipment is being used to its fullest advantage by examining operating data to identify equipment bottlenecks. Operating procedures Operating procedures may vary widely from person-to-person or from shift-to-shift. Automation of the plant can help significantly. But automation will be of no help if the operators take control and run the plant in manual. Control optimization In a typical processing plant, such as a chemical plant or oil refinery , there are hundreds or even thousands of control loops. Each control loop is responsible for controlling one part of the process, such as maintaining a temperature, level, or flow. If the control loop is not properly designed and tuned, the process runs below its optimum. The process will be more expensive to operate, and equipment will wear out prematurely. For each control loop to run optimally, identification of sensor, valve, and tuning problems is important. It has been well documented that over 35 of control loops typically have problems.  citation needed  The process of continuously monitoring and optimizing the entire plant is sometimes called performance supervision. See also  edit  Calculation of glass properties , optimization of several properties Deficit irrigation to optimize water productivity Process simulation Taguchi methods External links  edit  Reference TEXTBOOKS on Taguchi Methods TORSCHE Scheduling Toolbox for Matlab is a freely available toolbox of scheduling and graph algorithms. HillStormer, a Tool for constrained Optimization by Nelder  Mead in Industry and Research. Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleProcess_optimization oldid883004897  Categories  Business process management Mathematical optimization in business Hidden categories Articles lacking in-text citations from December 2011 All articles lacking in-text citations All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2008