Function model From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search A function model or functional model in systems engineering and software engineering is a structured representation of the functions  activities , actions , processes , operations  within the modeled system or subject area. 1  Example of a function model of the process of Maintain Reparable Spares in IDEF0 notation. A function model, similar with the activity model or process model , is a graphical representation of an enterprise s function within a defined scope. The purposes of the function model are to describe the functions and processes, assist with discovery of information needs, help identify opportunities, and establish a basis for determining product and service costs. 2  Contents 1 History 2 Functional modeling topics 2.1 Functional perspective 2.2 Functional decomposition 3 Functional modeling methods 3.1 Function block diagram 3.2 Functional Flow Block Diagram 3.3 HIPO and oPO 3.4 N2 Chart 3.5 Structured Analysis and Design Technique 3.6 IDEF0 3.7 Axiomatic Design 4 Related types of models 4.1 Business function model 4.2 Business Process Model and Notation 4.3 Business reference model 4.4 Operator function model 5 See also 6 References History  edit  The function model in the field of systems engineering and software engineering originates in the 1950s and 1960s, but the origin of functional modelling of organizational activity goes back to the late 19th century. In the late 19th century the first diagrams appeared that pictured business activities, actions, processes, or operations, and in the first half of the 20th century the first structured methods for documenting business process activities emerged. One of those methods was the flow process chart , introduced by Frank Gilbreth to members of American Society of Mechanical Engineers ASME in 1921 with the presentation, entitled Process ChartsFirst Steps in Finding the One Best Way. 3  Gilbreths tools quickly found their way into industrial engineering curricula. The emergence of the field of systems engineering can be traced back to Bell Telephone Laboratories in the 1940s. 4  The need to identify and manipulate the properties of a system as a whole, which in complex engineering projects may greatly differ from the sum of the parts properties, motivated various industries to apply the discipline. 5  One of the first to define the function model in this field was the British engineer William Gosling . In his book The design of engineering systems 1962, p. 25 he stated A functional model must thus achieve two aims in order to be of use. It must furnish a throughput description mechanics capable of completely defining the first and last throughput states, and perhaps some of the intervening states. It must also offer some means by which any input, correctly described in terms of this mechanics, can be used to generate an output which is an equ ally correct description of the output which the actual system would have given for the input concerned. It may also be noted that there are two other things which a functional model may do, but which are not necessary to all functional models. Thus such a system may, but need not, describe the system throughputs other than at the input and output, and it may also contain a des cription of the operation which each element carries out on the throughput, but once again this is not. 6  One of the first well defined function models, was the Functional Flow Block Diagram FFBD developed by the defense-related TRW Incorporated in the 1950s. 7  In the 1960s it was exploited by the NASA to visualize the time sequence of events in a space systems and flight missions. 8  It is further widely used in classical systems engineering to show the order of execution of system functions. 9  Functional modeling topics  edit  Functional perspective  edit  In systems engineering and software engineering a function model is created with a functional modeling perspective . The functional perspective is one of the perspectives possible in business process modelling , other perspectives are for example behavioural, organisational or informational. 10  A functional modeling perspective concentrates on describing the dynamic process . The main concept in this modeling perspective is the process, this could be a function, transformation, activity, action, task etc. A well-known example of a modeling language employing this perspective is data flow diagrams . The perspective uses four symbols to describe a process, these being Process Illustrates transformation from input to output. Store Data-collection or some sort of material. Flow Movement of data or material in the process. External Entity External to the modeled system, but interacts with it. Now, with these symbols, a process can be represented as a network of these symbols. This decomposed process is a DFD, data flow diagram. Example of functional decomposition in a systems analysis. In Dynamic Enterprise Modeling a division is made in the Control model , Function Model, Process model and Organizational model . Functional decomposition  edit  Functional decomposition refers broadly to the process of resolving a functional relationship into its constituent parts in such a way that the original function can be reconstructed from those parts by function composition . In general, this process of decomposition is undertaken either for the purpose of gaining insight into the identity of the constituent components, or for the purpose of obtaining a compressed representation of the global function, a task which is feasible only when the constituent processes possess a certain level of modularity . Functional decomposition has a prominent role in computer programming , where a major goal is to modularize processes to the greatest extent possible. For example, a library management system may be broken up into an inventory module, a patron information module, and a fee assessment module. In the early decades of computer programming, this was manifested as the art of subroutining, as it was called by some prominent practitioners. Functional decomposition of engineering systems is a method for analyzing engineered systems. The basic idea is to try to divide a system in such a way that each block of the block diagram can be described without an and or or in the description. This exercise forces each part of the system to have a pure function . When a system is composed of pure functions, they can be reused, or replaced. A usual side effect is that the interfaces between blocks become simple and generic. Since the interfaces usually become simple, it is easier to replace a pure function with a related, similar function. Functional modeling methods  edit  The functional approach is extended in multiple diagrammic techniques and modeling notations. This section gives an overview of the important techniques in chronological order. Function block diagram  edit  Functional block diagram of the attitude control and maneuvering electronics system of the Gemini spacecraft . June 1962. A functional block diagram is a block diagram , that describes the functions and interrelationships of a system . The functional block diagram can picture 11  Functions of a system pictured by blocks Input and output elements of a block pictured with lines, and Relationships between the functions Functional sequences and paths for matter and or signals 12  The block diagram can use additional schematic symbols to show particular properties. Specific function block diagram are the classic Functional Flow Block Diagram , and the Function Block Diagram FBD used in the design of programmable logic controllers . Functional Flow Block Diagram  edit  Functional Flow Block Diagram Format. 13  The Functional flow block diagram FFBD is a multi-tier, time-sequenced, step-by-step flow diagram of the system s functional flow. 14  The diagram is developed in the 1950s and widely used in classical systems engineering . The Functional Flow Block Diagram is also referred to as Functional Flow Diagram , functional block diagram , and functional flow . 15  Functional Flow Block Diagrams FFBD usually define the detailed, step-by-step operational and support sequences for systems , but they are also used effectively to define processes in developing and producing systems. The software development processes also use FFBDs extensively. In the system context, the functional flow steps may include combinations of hardware , software , personnel , facilities, andor procedures. In the FFBD method, the functions are organized and depicted by their logical order of execution. Each function is shown with respect to its logical relationship to the execution and completion of other functions. A node labeled with the function name depicts each function. Arrows from left to right show the order of execution of the functions. Logic symbols represent sequentia l or parallel execution of functions. 16  HIPO and oPO  edit  An expanded IPO Model . HIPO for hierarchical input process output is a popular 1970s systems analysis design aid and documentation technique 17  for representing the modules of a system as a hierarchy and for documenting each module. 18  It was used to develop requirements, construct the design, and support implementation of an expert system to demonstrate automated rendezvous. Verification was then conducted systematically because of the method of design and implementation. 19  The overall design of the system is documented using HIPO charts or structure charts . The structure chart is similar in appearance to an organizational chart, but has been modified to show additional detail. Structure charts can be used to display several types of information, but are used most commonly to diagram either data structures or code structures. 18  N2 Chart  edit  Figure 2. N2 chart definition. 20  The N2 Chart is a diagram in the shape of a matrix , representing functional or physical interfaces between system elements. It is used to systematically identify, define, tabulate, design, and analyze functional and physical interfaces. It applies to system interfaces and hardware andor software interfaces. 14  The N2 diagram has been used extensively to develop data interfaces, primarily in the software areas. However, it can also be used to develop hardware interfaces. The basic N2 chart is shown in Figure 2. The system functions are placed on the diagonal the remainder of the squares in the N x N matrix represent the interface inputs and outputs. 20  Structured Analysis and Design Technique  edit  SADT basis element. Structured Analysis and Design Technique SADT is a software engineering methodology for describing systems as a hierarchy of functions, a diagrammatic notation for constructing a sketch for a software application. It offers building blocks to represent entities and activities, and a variety of arrows to relate boxes. These boxes and arrows have an associated informal semantics . 21  SADT can be used as a functional analysis tool of a given process, using successive levels of details. The SADT method allows to define user needs for IT developments, which is used in industrial Information Systems, but also to explain and to present an activitys manufacturing processes, procedures. 22  The SADT supplies a specific functional view of any enterprise by describing the functions and their relationships in a company. These functions fulfill the objectives of a company, such as sales, order planning, product design, part manufacturing, and human resource management. The SADT can depict simple functional relationships and can reflect data and control flow relationsh ips between different functions. The IDEF0 formalism is based on SADT, developed by Douglas T. Ross in 1985. 23  IDEF0  edit  IDEF0 Diagram Example IDEF0 is a function modeling methodology for describing manufacturing functions, which offers a functional modeling language for the analysis, development, re-engineering, and integration of information systems  business processes or software engineering analysis. 24  It is part of the IDEF family of modeling languages in the field of software engineering , and is built on the functional modeling language building SADT . The IDEF0 Functional Modeling method is designed to model the decisions, actions, and activities of an organization or system. 25  It was derived from the established graphic modeling language Structured Analysis and Design Technique SADT developed by Douglas T. Ross and SofTech, Inc. . In its original form, IDEF0 includes both a definition of a graphical modeling language  syntax and semantics  and a description of a comprehensive methodology for developing models. 1  The US Air Force commissioned the SADT developers to develop a function model method for analyzing and communicating the functional perspective of a system. IDEF0 should assist in organizing system analysis and promote effective communication between the analyst and the customer through simplified graphical devices. 25  Axiomatic Design  edit  Axiomatic design is a top down hierarchical functional decomposition process used as a solution synthesis framework for the analysis, development, re-engineering, and integration of products, information systems, business processes or software engineering solutions. 26  Its structure is suited mathematically to analyze coupling between functions in order to optimize the architectural robustness of potential functional solution models. Related types of models  edit  In the field of systems and software engineering numerous specific function and functional models and close related models have been defined. Here only a few general types will be explained. Business function model  edit  A Business Function Model BFM is a general description or category of operations performed routinely to carry out an organizations mission. They provide a conceptual structure for the identification of general business functions. 27  It can show the critical business processes in the context of the business area functions. The processes in the business function model must be consistent with the processes in the value chain models. Processes are a group of related business activities performed to produce an end product or to provide a service. Unlike business functions that are performed on a continual basis, processes are characterized by the fact t hat they have a specific beginning and an end point marked by the delivery of a desired output. The figure on the right depicts the relationship between the business processes, business functions, and the business areas business reference model. 28  Business Process Model and Notation  edit  Business Process Modeling Notation Example. Business Process Model and Notation BPMN is a graphical representation for specifying business processes in a workflow . BPMN was developed by Business Process Management Initiative BPMI, and is currently maintained by the Object Management Group since the two organizations merged in 2005. The current version of BPMN is 2.0. 29  The Business Process Model and Notation BPMN specification provides a graphical notation for specifying business processes in a Business Process Diagram BPD. 30  The objective of BPMN is to support business process management for both technical users and business users by providing a notation that is intuitive to business users yet able to represent complex process semantics. The BPMN specification also provides a mapping between the graphics of the notation to the underlying constructs of execution languages, particularly BPEL4WS . 31  Business reference model  edit  This FEA Business reference model depicts the relationship between the business processes, business functions, and the business areas business reference model. A Business reference model is a reference model, concentrating on the functional and organizational aspects of the core business of an enterprise , service organization or government agency . In enterprise engineering a business reference model is part of an Enterprise Architecture Framework or Architecture Framework , which defines how to organize the structure and views associated with an Enterprise Architecture . A reference model in general is a model of something that embodies the basic goal or idea of something and can then be looked at as a reference for various purposes. A business reference model is a means to describe the business operations of an organization, independent of the organizational structure that perform them. Other types of business reference model can also depict the relationship between the business processes , business functions, and the business area s business reference model. These reference model can be constructed in layers, and offer a foundation for the analysis of service components, technology, data, and performance. Operator function model  edit  The Operator Function Model OFM is proposed as an alternative to traditional task analysis techniques used by human factors engineers. An operator function model attempts to represent in mathematical form how an operator might decompose a complex system into simpler parts and coordinate control actions and system configurations so that acceptable overall system performance is achieved. The model represents basic issues of knowledge representation, information flow, and decision making in complex sy stems. Miller 1985 suggests that the network structure can be thought of as a possible representation of an operators internal model of the system plus a control structure which specifies how the model is used to solve the decision problems that comprise operator control functions. 32  See also  edit  Wikimedia Commons has media related to Function models . Bus Functional Model Business process modeling Data model Enterprise modeling Functional Software Architecture Polynomial function model Rational function model Scientific modeling Unified Modeling Language View model References  edit   This article incorporates   public domain material from the National Institute of Standards and Technology website httpswww.nist.gov .  This article incorporates   public domain material from the Federal Aviation Administration document Operator Function Model OFM .  a b FIPS Publication 183 released of IDEF December 1993 by the Computer Systems Laboratory of the National Institute of Standards and Technology NIST.  Readers Guide to IDEF0 Function Models . Accessed 27 Nov 2008.  Ben B. Graham 2002. Detail Process Charting . p.2.  Schlager, J. July 1956. Systems engineering key to modern development. IRE Transactions . EM-3 3 6466. doi  10.1109IRET-EM.1956.5007383 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Arthur D. Hall 1962. A Methodology for Systems Engineering . Van Nostrand Reinhold. ISBN   0-442-03046-0 .  William Gosling 1962 The design of engineering systems . p. 23  Tim Weilkiens 2008. Systems Engineering with SysMLUML Modeling, Analysis, Design . Page 287.  Harold Chestnut 1967. Systems Engineering Methods . Page 254.  Thomas Dufresne  James Martin 2003. Process Modeling for E-Business Archived December 20, 2006, at the Wayback Machine . INFS 770 Methods for Information Systems Engineering Knowledge Management and E-Business. Spring 2003  Process perspectives . In Metamodeling and method engineering , Minna Koskinen, 2000.  James Perozzo 1994 The complete guide to electronics troubleshooting . p. 72  William H. Von Alven 1964 Reliability engineering explains Functional block diagrams show functional sequences and signal paths, and items which are wired in parallel are drawn in parallel p. 286  Systems Engineering Fundamentals. Archived September 27, 2007, at the Wayback Machine Defense Acquisition University Press, 2001  a b The first version of this article is completely based on the NAS SYSTEM ENGINEERING MANUAL SECTION 4.4 VERSION 3.1 060606.  Task Analysis Tools Used Throughout Development . FAA 2008. Retrieved 25 Sept 2008.  FAA 2006. NAS SYSTEM ENGINEERING MANUAL SECTION 4.4 VERSION 3.1 060606.  IBM Corporation 1974. HIPOA Design Aid and Documentation Technique , Publication Number GC20-1851, IBM Corporation, White Plains, NY, 1974.  a b Sandia National Laboratories 1992. Sandia Software Guidelines Volume 5 Tools, Techniques,and Methodologies SANDIA REPORTS 852348qUC32  Mary Ann Goodwin and Charles C. Robertson 1986. EXPERT SYSTEM VERIFICATION CONCERNS IN AN OPERATIONS ENVIRONMENT . NASA paper N88-17234.  a b NASA 1995. Techniques of Functional Analysis. In NASA Systems Engineering Handbook Archived 2008-12-17 at the Wayback Machine June 1995. p.142.  John Mylopoulos 2004. Conceptual Modelling III. Structured Analysis and Design Technique SADT . Retrieved 21 Sep 2008.  SADT at Free-logistics.com. Retrieved 21 Sep 2008.  Gavriel Salvendy 2001. Handbook of Industrial Engineering Technology and Operations Management. . p.508.  Systems Engineering Fundamentals. Archived September 27, 2007, at the Wayback Machine Defense Acquisition University Press, 2001.  a b Varun Grover , William J. Kettinger 2000. Process Think Winning Perspectives for Business Change in the Information Age. p.168.  Suh 2001. Axiomatic Design Advances and Applications, Oxford University Press, 2001, ISBN   0-19-513466-4  Paul Grefen 2010 Mastering e-Business . p. 5-10  US Department of Interior 2000-08 Analyze the Business and Define the Target Business Environment . Accessed 27 Nov 2008.  BPMN Information . Retrieved 2008-11-02 .  Richard C. Simpson 2004. An XML Representation for Crew Procedures . Final Report NASA Faculty Fellowship Program - 2004. Johnson Space Center.  S.A. White, Business Process Modeling Notation BPMN, In Business Process Management Initiative BPMI 3 May 2004.  Operator Function Model OFM . Accessed 27 Nov 2008. v t e Software engineering Fields Computer programming Requirements engineering Software deployment Software design Software maintenance Software testing Systems analysis Formal methods Concepts Data modeling Enterprise architecture Functional specification Modeling language Orthogonality Programming paradigm Software Software archaeology Software architecture Software configuration management Software development methodology Software development process Software quality Software quality assurance Software verification and validation Structured analysis Orientations Agile Aspect-oriented Object orientation Ontology Service orientation SDLC Models Developmental Agile EUP Executable UML Incremental model Iterative model Prototype model RAD UP Scrum Spiral model V-Model Waterfall model XP Other SPICE CMMI Data model ER model Function model Information model Metamodeling Object model Systems model View model Languages IDEF UML USL SysML Software engineers Victor Basili Kent Beck Grady Booch Fred Brooks Barry Boehm Peter Chen Danese Cooper Ward Cunningham Tom DeMarco Edsger W. Dijkstra Delores M. Etter Martin Fowler Adele Goldstine Margaret Hamilton C. A. R. Hoare Lois Haibt Mary Jean Harrold Grace Hopper Watts Humphrey Michael A. Jackson Ivar Jacobson Alan Kay Nancy Leveson Stephen J. Mellor Bertrand Meyer David Parnas Trygve Reenskaug Winston W. Royce James Rumbaugh Mary Shaw Peri Tarr Elaine Weyuker Niklaus Wirth Edward Yourdon Related fields Computer science Computer engineering Project management Risk management Systems engineering Category Commons v t e Systems engineering Subfields Aerospace engineering Biological systems engineering Configuration management Earth systems engineering and management Electrical engineering Enterprise systems engineering Performance engineering Reliability engineering Safety engineering Processes Requirements engineering Functional specification System integration Verification and validation Design review Concepts Business process System System lifecycle V-Model Systems development life cycle Tools Decision-making Function modelling IDEF Optimization Quality function deployment System dynamics Systems Modeling Language Systems analysis Systems modeling Work breakdown structure People James S. Albus Ruzena Bajcsy Benjamin S. Blanchard Wernher von Braun Kathleen Carley Harold Chestnut Wolt Fabrycky Barbara Grosz Arthur David Hall III Derek Hitchins Robert E. Machol Radhika Nagpal Simon Ramo Joseph Francis Shea Katia Sycara Manuela M. Veloso John N. Warfield Related fields Control engineering Computer engineering Industrial engineering Operations research Project management Quality management Risk management Software engineering Category Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleFunction_model oldid888460831  Categories  Software architecture Systems analysis Systems engineering Software design Modeling languages Hidden categories Webarchive template wayback links Commons category link is locally defined Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the National Institute of Standards and Technology Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the Federal Aviation Administration