Application-release automation From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Software development Core activities Processes Requirements Design Engineering Construction Testing Debugging Deployment Maintenance Paradigms and models Agile Cleanroom Incremental Prototyping Spiral V model Waterfall Methodologies and frameworks ASD DevOps DAD DSDM FDD IID Kanban Lean SD LeSS MDD MSF PSP RAD RUP SAFe Scrum SEMAT TSP UP XP Supporting disciplines Configuration management Documentation Software quality assurance SQA Project management User experience Practices ATDD BDD CCO CI CD DDD PP SBE Stand-up TDD Tools Compiler Debugger Profiler GUI designer Modeling IDE Build automation Release automation Infrastructure as code Testing Standards and Bodies of Knowledge BABOK CMMI IEEE standards ISO 9001 ISOIEC standards PMBOK SWEBOK ITIL Glossaries Artificial intelligence Computer science Electrical and electronics engineering v t e Application-release automation  ARA  refers to the process of packaging and deploying an application or update of an application from development, across various environments, and ultimately to production. 1  ARA solutions must combine the capabilities of deployment automation, environment management and modeling, and release coordination. 2  Contents 1 Relationship with DevOps 2 Relationship with Deployment 3 ARA Solutions 4 References Relationship with DevOps  edit  ARA tools help cultivate DevOps best practices by providing a combination of automation, environment modeling and workflow-management capabilities. These practices help teams deliver software rapidly, reliably and responsibly. ARA tools achieve a key DevOps goal of implementing continuous delivery with a large quantity of releases quickly. 3  Relationship with Deployment  edit  ARA is more than just software-deployment automation  it deploys applications using structured release-automation techniques that allow for an increase in visibility for the whole team. 4  It combines workload automation and release-management tools as they relate to release packages, as well as movement through different environments within the DevOps pipeline. 5  ARA tools help regulate deployments, how environments are created and deployed, and how and when releases are deployed. 6  ARA Solutions  edit  Gartner and Forrester have published lists of ARA tools in their ARA Magic Quadrant and Wave reports respectively. 7  8  All ARA solutions must include capabilities in automation, environment modeling, and release coordination. Additionally, the solution must provide this functionality without reliance on other tools. 9  Solution Released by BuildMaster Inedo CA Release Automation and Automic CA Technologies DeployHub OpenMake Software Deployment Automation formerly Serena Deployment Automation Micro Focus ElectricFlow Electric Cloud Hybrid Cloud Management Ultimate Edition Micro Focus IBM UrbanCode Deploy IBM Puppet Enterprise Puppet Release Lifecycle Management BMC Software Visual Studio Release Management Microsoft XL Deploy  XL Release XebiaLabs References  edit   Gartner IT Glossary  Application Release Automation ARA . Gartner . Retrieved 25 September 2014 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Application Release Automation Market Forecast Report. Forrester. 2015.  Garner Market Trends DevOps  Not a Market, but Tool-Centric Philosophy That supports a Continuous Delivery Value Chain Report. Gartner. 18 February 2015.  Humble, Jez Farley, David 2011. Continuous Delivery reliable software releases through build, test, and deployment automation . Pearson Education Inc. p.  255-257. ISBN   978-0-321-60191-9 .  Market Overview Application Release Automation Tools Report. Forrester. 2015.  Market Guide for Application Release Automation Solutions Report. Gartner. 20 July 2015.  Fletcher, Colin 27 September 2017. Magic Quadrant for Application Release Automation Report. Gartner.  Stroud, Robert 30 August 2017. The Forrester Wave Continuous Delivery and Release Automation, Q3 2017 . www.forrester.com .  Fletcher, Colin 1 August 2016. Critical Capabilities for Application Release Automation Solutions Report. Gartner. Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleApplication-release_automation oldid911282484  Categories  Application software Software release