IEEE Spectrum From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search IEEE Spectrum Front cover of the July 2006 issue Editor Susan Hassler Categories Electrical engineering Publisher Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers First issue January 1964 Country United States Based in New York City , New York Website spectrum .ieee .org ISSN 0018-9235 IEEE Spectrum is a magazine edited by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers . The IEEEs description of it is .mw-parser-output .templatequoteoverflowhiddenmargin1em 0padding0 40px.mw-parser-output .templatequote .templatequoteciteline-height1.5emtext-alignleftpadding-left1.6emmargin-top0 IEEE Spectrum is the flagship magazine and website of the IEEE, the worlds largest professional organization devoted to engineering and the applied sciences. Our charter is to keep over 400,000 members informed about major trends and developments in technology, engineering, and science. Our blogs, podcasts, news and features stories, videos and interactive infographics engage our visitors with clear explanations about emerging concepts and developments with details they cant get elsewhere. 1  IEEE Spectrum began publishing in January 1964 as a successor to Electrical Engineering . It contains peer-reviewed articles pertaining to technology and science trends affecting business and society, with a scope that covers information pertaining to electrical and electronics engineering, mechanical and civil engineering, computer science, biology, physics and mathematics. Additional content is gleaned from several hundred annual international conferences. As a general magazine, the articles attempt to be accessible to non-specialists, though an engineering background is assumed. Twelve issues are published annually, and IEEE Spectrum has a circulation of over 380,000 engineers worldwide, making it one of the leading science and engineering magazines. Article submission to IEEE Spectrum is open access. Individuals and corporations have the right to post their IEEE-copyrighted materials on their own servers without express permission. In 2010, IEEE Spectrum was the recipient of Utne Reader magazines Utne Independent Press Award for ScienceTechnology Coverage. 2  In 2012 IEEE Spectrum was selected as the winner of the National Magazine Awards General Excellence Among Thought Leader Magazines category. 3  References  edit   About IEEE Spectrum . Spectrum.IEEE.org . Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers . 2009-05-30. .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Winners of the 2010 Utne Independent Press Awards . Retrieved 27 October 2010 .  National Magazine Awards General Excellence Among Thought Leader Magazines . 2012-05-07 . Retrieved 21 April 2015 . External links  edit  Official website v t e Major English-language science and technology magazines Australia Australian Geographic Cosmos Australasian Science Canada Canadian Geographic United Kingdom Astronomy Now BBC Focus BBC Sky at Night BBC Wildlife Computeractive Computer Weekly Computing Geographical Medicine Magazine New Scientist PC Pro The Inquirer The Register Wired UK United States American Scientist Astrobiology Magazine Astronomy Discover InformationWeek MIT Technology Review National Geographic PC Magazine PC World Popular Mechanics Popular Science Science News Scientific American Scientific American Mind Seed Wired Sky  Telescope See also Science and technology magazines category Cell Communications of the ACM Computer IEEE Spectrum Nature PNAS Proceedings of the Royal Society Science AlphaGalileo Ars Technica Gizmodo Lifehacker Slashdot TechCrunch Engadget CNET SmartPlanet Mashable ReadWriteWeb This science and technology magazinerelated article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it . v t e See tips for writing articles about magazines . Further suggestions might be found on the articles talk page . Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleIEEE_Spectrum oldid895734484  Categories  American monthly magazines American science and technology magazines Engineering magazines IEEE magazines Magazines established in 1964 Magazines published in New York City Open access publications Science and technology magazine stubs Hidden categories Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia All stub articles