Scope project management From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search This article may need to be rewritten to comply with Wikipedias quality standards . You can help . The discussion page may contain suggestions.  August 2016  In project management , the term scope has two distinct uses Project Scope and Product Scope. Scope involves getting information required to start a project, and the features the product would have that would meet its stakeholders requirements. Project Scope The work that needs to be accomplished to deliver a product, service, or result with the specified features and functions. 1  Product Scope The features and functions that characterize a product, service, or result. 1  Notice that Project Scope is more work-oriented the hows, while Product Scope is more oriented toward functional requirements the whats. If requirements arent completely defined and described and if there is no effective change control in a project, scope or requirement creep may ensue. Scope Management is the listing of the items to be produced or tasks to be done to the required quantity, quality and variety, in the time and with the resources available and agreed upon, and the modification of those variable constraints by dynamic flexible juggling in the event of changed circumstance called as Scope creep . See also  edit  Cost overrun Scope creep Scope statement References  edit   a b A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge PMBOK Guide - Fourth Edition . Project Management Institute, 2008. .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em ISBN   978-1-933890-51-7 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleScope_project_management oldid857186496  Categories  Project management Hidden categories Wikipedia articles needing rewrite from August 2016 All articles needing rewrite