Health informatics From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search See also Health information technology Electronic patient chart from a health information system Health informatics also called health care informatics , healthcare informatics , medical informatics , nursing informatics , clinical informatics , or biomedical informatics  is information engineering applied to the field of health care , essentially the management and use of patient healthcare information. It is a multidisciplinary field 1  that uses health information technology HIT to improve health care via any combination of higher quality, higher efficiency spurring lower cost and thus greater availability, and new opportunities. The disciplines involved include information science , computer science , social science , behavioral science , management science , and others. The NLM defines health informatics as the interdisciplinary study of the design, development, adoption and application of IT-based innovations in healthcare services delivery, management and planning. 2  It deals with the resources, devices, and methods required to optimize the acquisition, storage, retrieval, and use of information in health and bio-medicine. Health informatics tools include computers, clinical guidelines , formal medical terminologies, and information and communication systems, among others. 3  4  It is applied to the areas of nursing , clinical medicine , dentistry , pharmacy , public health , occupational therapy , physical therapy , biomedical research , and alternative medicine , 5   unreliable medical source  all of which are designed to improve the overall of effectiveness of patient care delivery by ensuring that the data generated is of a high quality. 6  The international standards on the subject are covered by ICS 35.240.80 7  in which ISO 27799 2008 is one of the core components. 8  Contents 1 Subspecialities 2 Healthcare informatics 2.1 Clinical informatics 2.2 Integrated data repository 2.3 Clinical research informatics 2.3.1 Common data elements CDEs in clinical research 2.3.2 Data sharing platforms for clinical study data 3 Human bioinformatics 3.1 Translational bioinformatics 4 Computational health informatics 5 Informatics for education and research in health and medicine 5.1 Clinical research informatics 6 History 6.1 In the United States 6.1.1 Informatics certifications 6.2 In the UK 6.2.1 Informatics certifications 7 Current state and policy initiatives 7.1 Argentina 7.2 Brazil 7.3 Canada 7.4 United States 7.5 Europe 7.5.1 UK 7.5.1.1 England 7.5.1.2 Scotland 7.5.1.3 Wales 7.5.2 Netherlands 7.5.3 Emerging Directions European R D 7.6 Asia and Oceania 7.6.1 Australia 7.6.2 China 7.6.2.1 In China 7.6.2.2 Standards in China 7.6.2.3 Comparison between Chinas EHR Standard and Segments of the ASTM E 1384 Standard 7.6.3 Hong Kong 7.6.4 India 7.6.5 Malaysia 7.6.6 New Zealand 7.6.7 Saudi Arabia 7.7 Post-Soviet countries 7.7.1 The Russian Federation 8 Law 9 Health and medical informatics journals 10 See also 10.1 Related concepts 10.2 Standardsframeworks and governance 10.3 Algorithms 11 References 12 Further reading 13 External links Subspecialities  edit  Healthcare informatics includes sub-fields of clinical informatics, such as pathology informatics , clinical research informatics see section below, imaging informatics , public health informatics , community health informatics , home health informatics , nursing informatics, medical informatics, consumer health informatics , clinical bioinformatics , and informatics for education and research in health and medicine, pharmacy informatics. 9  10  11  12  13  14   excessive citations  Healthcare informatics  edit  This section possibly contains inappropriate or misinterpreted citations that do not verify the text . Please help improve this article by checking for citation inaccuracies.  May 2018   Learn how and when to remove this template message  Clinical informatics  edit  Clinical informatics is concerned with the use of information in health care by and for clinicians . 15  16  Clinical informaticians, also known as clinical informaticists, transform health care by analyzing, designing, implementing, and evaluating information and communication systems that enhance individual and population health outcomes, improve patient care, and strengthen the clinician-patient relationship. Clinical informaticians use their knowledge of patient care combined with their understanding of informatics concepts, methods, and health informatics tools to assess information and knowledge needs of health care professionals, patients and their families. characterize, evaluate, and refine clinical processes, develop, implement, and refine clinical decision support systems , and lead or participate in the procurement, customization, development, implementation, management, evaluation, and continuous improvement of clinical information systems. Clinicians collaborate with other health care and information technology professionals to develop health informatics tools which promote patient care that is safe, efficient, effective, timely, patient-centered, and equitable. Many clinical informaticists are also computer scientists. In October 2011 American Board of Medical Specialties  ABMS , the organization overseeing the certification of specialist MDs in the United States, announced the creation of MD-only physician certification in clinical informatics. The first examination for board certification in the subspecialty of clinical informatics was offered in October 2013 by American Board of Preventive Medicine ABPM with 432 passing to become the 2014 inaugural class of Diplomates in clinical informatics. 17  Fellowship programs exist for physicians who wish to become board-certified in clinical informatics. Physicians must have graduated from a medical school in the United States or Canada, or a school located elsewhere that is approved by the ABPM. In addition, they must complete a primary residency program such as Internal Medicine or any of the 24 subspecialties recognized by t he ABMS and be eligible to become licensed to practice medicine in the state where their fellowship program is located. 18  The fellowship program is 24 months in length, with fellows dividing their time between Informatics rotations, didactic method, research, and clinical work in their primary specialty. Integrated data repository  edit  Example IDR schema Achilles tool for data characterization of a healthcare dataset One of the fundamental elements of biomedical and translation research is the use of integrated data repositories. A survey conducted in 2010 defined integrated data repository IDR as a data warehouse incorporating various sources of clinical data to support queries for a range of research-like functions. 19  Integrated data repositories are complex systems developed to solve a variety of problems ranging from identity management, protection of confidentiality, semantic and syntactic comparability of data from different sources, and most importantly convenient and flexible query. 20  Development of the field of clinical informatics led to the creation of large data sets with electronic health record data integrated with other data such as genomic data. Types of data repositories include operational data stores ODSs, clinical data warehouses CDWs, clinical data marts, and clinical registries. 21  Operational data stores established for extracting, transferring and loading before creating warehouse or data marts. 21  Clinical registries repositories have long been in existence, but their contents are disease specific and sometimes considered archaic. 21  Clinical data stores and clinical data warehouses are considered fast and reliable. Though these large integrated repositories have impacted clinical research significantly, it still faces challenges and barriers. One big problem is the requirement for ethical approval by the institutional review board IRB for each research analysis meant for publication. 22  Some research resources do not require IRB approval. For example, CDWs with data of deceased patients have been de-identified and IRB approval is not required for their usage. 22  19  21  20  Another challenge is data quality . Methods that adjust for bias such as using propensity score matching methods assume that a complete health record is captured. Tools that examine data quality e.g., point to missing data help in discovering data quality problems. 23  Clinical research informatics  edit  Clinical research informatics CRI is a sub-field of health informatics that tries to improve the efficiency of clinical research by using informatics methods. Some of the problems tackled by CRI are creation of data warehouses of healthcare data that can be used for research, support of data collection in clinical trials by the use of electronic data capture systems, streamlining ethical approvals and renewals in US the responsible entity is the local institutional review board , maintenance of repositories of past clinical trial data de-identified. CRI is a fairly new branch of informatics and has met growing pains as any up and coming field does. Some issue CRI faces is the ability for the statisticians and the computer system architects to work with the clinical research staff in designing a system and lack of funding to support the development of a new system. Researchers and the informatics team have a difficult tim e coordinating plans and ideas in order to design a system that is easy to use for the research team yet fits in the system requirements of the computer team. The lack of funding can be a hindrance to the development of the CRI. Many organizations who are performing research are struggling to get financial support to conduct the research, much less invest that money in an info rmatics system that will not provide them any more income or improve the outcome of the research Embi, 2009. Common data elements CDEs in clinical research  edit  Ability to integrate data from multiple clinical trials is an important part of clinical research informatics. Initiatives, such as PhenX and Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System triggered a general effort to improve secondary use of data collected in past human clinical trials. CDE initiatives, for example, try to allow clinical trial designers to adopt standardized research instruments  electronic case report forms . 24  Data sharing platforms for clinical study data  edit  A parallel effort to standardizing how data is collected are initiatives that offer de-identified patient level clinical study data to be downloaded by researchers who wish to re-use this data. Examples of such platforms are Project Data Sphere, 25  dbGaP , ImmPort 26  or Clinical Study Data Request. 27  Informatics issues in data formats for sharing results plain CSV files, FDA endorsed formats, such as CDISC Study Data Tabulation Model are important challenges within the field of clinical research informatics. Human bioinformatics  edit  Translational bioinformatics  edit  With the completion of the human genome and the recent advent of high throughput sequencing and genome-wide association studies of single nucleotide polymorphic organisms, the fields of molecular bioinformatics, bio-statistics, statistical genetics and clinical informatics are converging into the emerging field of translational bioinformatics . 28  29  30  The relationship between bioinformatics and health informatics, while conceptually related under the umbrella of biomedical informatics, 31  has not always been very clear. The TBI community is specifically motivated with the development of approaches to identify linkages between fundamental biological and clinical information. Along with complementary areas of emphasis, such as those focused on developing systems and approaches within clinical research contexts, 32  insights from TBI may enable a new paradigm for the study and treatment of disease. Translational Bioinformatics TBI is a relatively new field that surfaced in the year of 2000 when human genome sequence was released. 33  The commonly used definition of TBI is lengthy and could be found on the AMIA website. 34  In simpler terms, TBI could be defined as a collection of colossal amounts of health related data biomedical and genomic and translation of the data into individually tailored clinical entities. 33  Today, TBI field is categorized into four major themes that are briefly described below Clinical big data Clinical big data is a collection of electronic health records that are used for innovations. The evidence-based approach that is currently practiced in medicine is suggested to be merged with the practice-based medicine to achieve better outcomes for patients. As CEO of California-based cognitive computing firm Apixio, Darren Schutle, explains that the care can be better fitted to the patient if the data could be collected from various medical records, merged, and analyzed. Further, the combination of similar profiles can serve as a basis for personalized medicine pointing to what works and what does not for certain condition Marr, 2016. Genomics in clinical care Genomic data are used to identify the genes involvement in unknown or rare conditionssyndromes. Currently, the most vigorous area of using genomics is oncology. The identification of genomic sequencing of cancer may define reasons of drugs sensitivity and resistance during oncological treatment processes. 33  Omics for drugs discovery and repurposing Repurposing of the drug is an appealing idea that allows the pharmaceutical companies to sell an already approved drug to treat a different conditiondisease that the drug was not initially approved for by the FDA. The observation of molecular signatures in disease and compare those to signatures observed in cells points to the possibility of a drug ability to cure andor rel ieve symptoms of a disease. 33  Personalized genomic testing In the US, several companies offer direct-to-consumer DTC genetic testing . The company that performs the majority of testing is called 23andMe. Utilizing genetic testing in health care raises many ethical, legal and social concerns one of the main questions is whether the healthcare providers are ready to include patient-supplied genomic information while providing care that is unbiased despite the intimate genomic knowledge and a high quality. T he documented examples of incorporating such information into a healthcare delivery showed both positive and negative impacts on the overall healthcare related outcomes. 33  Computational health informatics  edit  Computational health informatics is a branch of computer science that deals specifically with computational techniques that are relevant in healthcare. Computational health informatics is also a branch of health informatics, but is orthogonal to much of the work going on in health informatics because computer scientists interest is mainly in understanding fundamental properties of computation. Health informatics, on the other hand, is prim arily concerned with understanding fundamental properties of medicine that allow for the intervention of computers. The health domain provides an extremely wide variety of problems that can be tackled using computational techniques, and computer scientists are attempting to make a difference in medicine by studying the underlying principles of computer science that will allow f or meaningful to medicine algorithms and systems to be developed. Thus, computer scientists working in computational health informatics and health scientists working in medical health informatics combine to develop the next generation of healthcare technologies. Using computers to analyze health data has been around since the 1950s, but it wasnt until the 1990s that the first sturdy models appeared. The development of the Internet has helped develop computational health informatics over the past decade. Computer models are used to examine various topics such as how exercise affects obesity, healthcare costs, and many more. 35  Examples of projects in computational health informatics include the COACH project. 36  37  Informatics for education and research in health and medicine  edit  Clinical research informatics  edit  Clinical research informatics CRI is an amalgamation of clinical and research informatics. Featuring both clinical and research informatics, CRI has a vital role in clinical research, patient care, and the building of healthcare system Katzan  Rudick, 2012. CRI is one of the rapidly growing subdivisions of biomedical informatics which plays an important role in developing new informatics theories, tools, and solutions to accelerate the full transitional continuum Kahn  Weng, 2012. Evolution of CRI was extremely important in Informatics as there was an extraordinary increase in the scope and pace of clinical and translational science advancements Katzan  Rudick, 2012. Clinical research informatics takes the core foundations, principles, and technologies related to Health Informatics, and applies these to clinical research contexts. 38  As such, CRI is a sub-discipline of health informatics, and interest and activities in CRI have increased greatly in recent years given the overwhelming problems associated with the explosive growth of clinical research data and information. 39  There are a number of activities within clinical research that CRI supports, including more efficient and effective data collection and acquisition improved recruitment into clinical trials optimal protocol design and efficient management patient recruitment and management adverse event reporting regulatory compliance data storage, transfer, 40  processing and analysis repositories of data from completed clinical trials for secondary analyses History  edit  Worldwide use of computer technology in medicine began in the early 1950s with the rise of the computers. 41  In 1949, Gustav Wagner established the first professional organization for informatics in Germany. 42  The prehistory, history, and future of medical information and health information technology are discussed in reference. 43  Specialized university departments and Informatics training programs began during the 1960s in France, Germany, Belgium and The Netherlands. Medical informatics research units began to appear during the 1970s in Poland and in the U.S. 42  Since then the development of high-quality health informatics research, education and infrastructure has been a goal of the U.S. and the European Union. 42  Early names for health informatics included medical computing, biomedical computing, medical computer science, computer medicine, medical electronic data processing, medical automatic data processing, medical information processing, medical information science, medical software engineering, and medical computer technology.  citation needed  The health informatics community is still growing, it is by no means a mature profession, but work in the UK by the voluntary registration body, the UK Council of Health Informatics Professions has suggested eight key constituencies within the domaininformation management, knowledge management, portfolioprogramproject management, ICT, education and research, clinical informa tics, health recordsservice and business-related, health informatics service management. These constituencies accommodate professionals in and for the NHS, in academia and commercial service and solution providers. Since the 1970s the most prominent international coordinating body has been the International Medical Informatics Association IMIA. 44  In the United States  edit  Even though the idea of using computers in medicine emerged as technology advanced in the early 20th century, it was not until the 1950s that informatics began to have an effect in the United States. 41  The earliest use of electronic digital computers for medicine was for dental projects in the 1950s at the United States National Bureau of Standards by Robert Ledley . 45  During the mid-1950s, the United States Air Force USAF carried out several medical projects on its computers while also encouraging civilian agencies such as the National Academy of Sciences  National Research Council NAS-NRC and the National Institutes of Health NIH to sponsor such work. 46  In 1959, Ledley and Lee B. Lusted published Reasoning Foundations of Medical Diagnosis, a widely read article in Science , which introduced computing especially operations research techniques to medical workers. Ledley and Lusteds article has remained influential for decades, especially within the field of medical decision making. 47  Guided by Ledleys late 1950s survey of computer use in biology and medicine carried out for the NAS-NRC, and by his and Lusteds articles, the NIH undertook the first major effort to introduce computers to biology and medicine. This effort, carried out initially by the NIHs Advisory Committee on Computers in Research ACCR, chaired by Lusted, spent over 40 million between 1960 and 1964 in order to establish dozens of large and small biomedical research centers in the US. 46  One early 1960, non-ACCR use of computers was to help quantify normal human movement, as a precursor to scientifically measuring deviations from normal, and design of prostheses. 48  The use of computers IBM 650, 1620, and 7040 allowed analysis of a large sample size, and of more measurements and subgroups than had been previously practical with mechanical calculators, thus allowing an objective understanding of how human locomotion varies by age and body characteristics. A study co-author was Dean of the Marquette University College of Engineering thi s work led to discrete Biomedical Engineering departments there and elsewhere. The next steps, in the mid-1960s, were the development sponsored largely by the NIH of expert systems such as MYCIN and Internist-I . In 1965, the National Library of Medicine started to use MEDLINE and MEDLARS . Around this time, Neil Pappalardo , Curtis Marble, and Robert Greenes developed MUMPS Massachusetts General Hospital Utility Multi-Programming System in Octo Barnett s Laboratory of Computer Science 49  at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston , another center of biomedical computing that received significant support from the NIH. 50  In the 1970s and 1980s it was the most commonly used programming language for clinical applications. The MUMPS operating system was used to support MUMPS language specifications. As of 2004 update  , a descendant of this system is being used in the United States Veterans Affairs hospital system. The VA has the largest enterprise-wide health information system that includes an electronic medical record , known as the Veterans Health Information Systems and Technology Architecture VistA . A graphical user interface known as the Computerized Patient Record System CPRS allows health care providers to review and update a patients electronic medical record at any of the VAs over 1,000 health care facilities. During the 1960s, Morris Collen, a physician working for Kaiser Permanente s Division of Research, developed computerized systems to automate many aspects of multi-phased health checkups. These systems became the basis the larger medical databases Kaiser Permanente developed during the 1970s and 1980s. 51  The American College of Medical Informatics ACMI has since 1993 annually bestowed the Morris F. Collen, MD Medal for Outstanding Contributions to the Field of Medical Informatics. 52  Kaiser permanente In the 1970s a growing number of commercial vendors began to market practice management and electronic medical records systems. Although many products exist, only a small number of health practitioners use fully featured electronic health care records systems. In 1970, Warner V. Slack, MD, and Howard L. Bleich, MD, co-founded the academic division of clinical informatics 53  at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical School. Warner Slack is a pioneer of the development of the electronic patient medical history, 54  and in 1977 Dr. Bleich created the first user-friendly search engine for the worlds biomedical literature. 55  In 2002, Dr. Slack and Dr. Bleich were awarded the Morris F. Collen Award for their pioneering contributions to medical informatics. 56  Computerized systems involved in patient care have led to a number of changes. Such changes have led to improvements in electronic health records which are now capable of sharing medical information among multiple healthcare stakeholdersZahabi, Kaber,  Swangnetr, 2015 thereby, supporting the flow of patient information through various modalities of care. Computer use today involves a broad ability which includes but isnt limited to physician diagnosis and documentation, patient appointment scheduling, and billing. Many researchers in the field have identified an increase in the quality of healthcare systems, decreased errors by healthcare workers, and lastly savings in time and money Zahabi, Kaber,  Swangnetr, 2015. The system, however, is not perfect and will continue to require improvement. Frequently cited factors of concern involve usability, safety, accessibility, and user-friendliness Zahabi, Kaber,  Swangnetr, 2015. As leaders in the field of medical informatics improve upon the aforementioned factors of concern, the overall provision of health care will continue to improve. 57  58  Homer R. Warner , one of the fathers of medical informatics, 59  founded the Department of Medical Informatics at the University of Utah in 1968. The American Medical Informatics Association AMIA has an award named after him on application of informatics to medicine. Informatics certifications  edit  Like other IT training specialties, there are Informatics certifications available to help informatics professionals stand out and be recognized. The American Nurses Credentialing Center ANCC offers a board certification in Nursing Informatics. 60  For Radiology Informatics, the CIIP Certified Imaging Informatics Professional certification was created by ABII The American Board of Imaging Informatics which was founded by SIIM the Society for Imaging Informatics in Medicine and ARRT the American Registry of Radiologic Technologists in 2005. The CIIP certification requires documented experience working in Imaging Informatics, formal testing and is a limited time credential requiring renewal every five years. The exam tests for a combination of IT technical knowledge, clinical understanding, and project management experience thought to represent the typical workload of a PACS administrator or other radiology IT clinical support role. 61  Certifications from PARCA PACS Administrators Registry and Certifications Association are also recognized. The five PARCA certifications are tiered from entry-level to architect level. The American Health Information Management Association offers credentials in medical coding , analytics, and data administration, such as Registered Health Information Administrator and Certified Coding Associate. 62  Certifications are widely requested by employers in health informatics, and overall the demand for certified informatics workers in the United States is outstripping supply. 63  The American Health Information Management Association reports that only 68 of applicants pass certification exams on the first try. 64  In 2017, a consortium of health informatics trainers composed of MEASURE Evaluation, Public Health Foundation India, University of Pretoria, Kenyatta University, and the University of Ghana identified the following areas of knowledge as a curriculum for the digital health workforce, especially in low- and middle-income countries clinical decision support telehealth  privacy, security, and confidentiality workflow process improvement technology, people, and processes process engineering quality process improvement and health information technology computer hardware software databases data warehousing information networks information systems information exchange data analytics and usability methods. 65  In the UK  edit  The broad history of health informatics has been captured in the book UK Health Computing Recollections and reflections , Hayes G, Barnett D Eds., BCS May 2008 by those active in the field, predominantly members of BCS Health and its constituent groups. The book describes the path taken as early development of health informatics was unorganized and idiosyncratic. In the early 1950s, it was prompted by those involved in NHS finance and only in the early 1960s did solutions including those in pathology 1960, radiotherapy 1962, immunization 1963, and primary care 1968 emerge. Many of these solutions, even in the early 1970s were developed in-house by pioneers in the field to meet their own requirements. In part, this was due to some areas of health services for example the immunization and vaccination of children still being provided by Local Authoriti es. Interesting, this is a situation which the coalition government proposes broadly to return to in the 2010 strategy Equity and Excellence Liberating the NHS July 2010 stating We will put patients at the heart of the NHS, through an information revolution and greater choice and control with shared decision-making becoming the norm no decision about me without me and patients having access to the information they want, to make choices about their care. They will have increased control over their own care records. These types of statements present a significant opportunity for health informaticians to come out of the back-office and take up a front-line role in supporting clinical practice, and the business of care delivery. The UK health informatics community has long played a key role in the international activity, joining TC4 of the International Federation of Information Processing  1969 which became IMIA 1979. Under the aegis of BCS Health, Cambridge was the host for the first EFMI Medical Informatics Europe 1974 conference and London was the location for IMIAs tenth global congress MEDINFO2001. Informatics certifications  edit  BCS via FEDIP provides 4 different professional registration levels for Health and Care Informatics Professionals Practitioner, Senior Practitioner, Advanced Practitioner, and Leading Practitioner. FEDIP is the Federation for Informatics Professionals in Health and Social Care, a collaboration between the leading professional bodies in health and care informatics supporting the development of the informatics profession. Current state and policy initiatives  edit  This article reads like a review rather than an encyclopedic description of the subject . Please help improve this article to make it neutral in tone and meet Wikipedias quality standards .  August 2009  Argentina  edit  Since 1997, the Buenos Aires Biomedical Informatics Group, a nonprofit group, represents the interests of a broad range of clinical and non-clinical professionals working within the Health Informatics sphere. Its purposes are Promote the implementation of the computer tool in the healthcare activity, scientific research, health administration and in all areas related to health sciences and biomedical research. Support, promote and disseminate content related activities with the management of health information and tools they used to do under the name of Biomedical informatics. Promote cooperation and exchange of actions generated in the field of biomedical informatics, both in the public and private, national and international level. Interact with all scientists, recognized academic stimulating the creation of new instances that have the same goal and be inspired by the same purpose. To promote, organize, sponsor and participate in events and activities for training in computer and information and disseminating developments in this area that might be useful for team members and health related activities. The Argentinian health system is heterogeneous in its function, and because of that the informatics developments show a heterogeneous stage. Many private Health Care center have developed systems, such as the Hospital Aleman of Buenos Aires, or the Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires that also has a residence program for health informatics. Brazil  edit  Main article Brazilian Society of Health Informatics The first applications of computers to medicine and healthcare in Brazil started around 1968, with the installation of the first mainframes in public university hospitals, and the use of programmable calculators in scientific research applications. Minicomputers, such as the IBM 1130 were installed in several universities, and the first applications were developed for them, such as the hospital census in the School of Medicine of Ribeiro Preto and patient master files, in the Hospital das Clnicas da Universidade de So Paulo , respectively at the cities of Ribeiro Preto and So Paulo campuses of the University of So Paulo . In the 1970s, several Digital Corporation and Hewlett Packard minicomputers were acquired for public and Armed Forces hospitals, and more intensively used for intensive-care unit , cardiology diagnostics, patient monitoring and other applications. In the early 1980s, with the arrival of cheaper microcomputers , a great upsurge of computer applications in health ensued, and in 1986 the Brazilian Society of Health Informatics was founded, the first Brazilian Congress of Health Informatics was held, and the first Brazilian Journal of Health Informatics was published. In Brazil, two universities are pioneers in teaching and research in Medical Informatics, both the University of Sao Paulo and the Federal University of Sao Paulo offer undergraduate programs highly qualified in the area as well as extensive graduate programs MSc and PhD. In 2015 the Universidade Federal de Cincias da Sade de Porto Alegre , Rio Grande do Sul , also started to offer undergraduate program. Canada  edit  Health Informatics projects in Canada are implemented provincially, with different provinces creating different systems. A national, federally funded, not-for-profit organization called Canada Health Infoway was created in 2001 to foster the development and adoption of electronic health records across Canada. As of December 31, 2008 there were 276 EHR projects under way in Canadian hospitals, other health-care facilities, pharmacies and laboratories, with an investment value of 1.5-billion from Canada Health Infoway. 66  Provincial and territorial programmes include the following eHealth Ontario was created as an Ontario provincial government agency in September 2008. It has been plagued by delays and its CEO was fired over a multimillion-dollar contracts scandal in 2009. 67  Alberta Netcare was created in 2003 by the Government of Alberta. Today the netCARE portal is used daily by thousands of clinicians. It provides access to demographic data, prescribeddispensed drugs, known allergiesintolerances, immunizations, laboratory test results, diagnostic imaging reports, the diabetes registry and other medical reports. netCARE interface capabilities are being includ ed in electronic medical record products which are being funded by the provincial government. United States  edit  In 2004, President George W. Bush signed Executive Order 13335, 68  creating the Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology ONCHIT as a division of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services HHS. The mission of this office is widespread adoption of interoperable electronic health records EHRs in the US within 10 years. See quality improvement organizations for more information on federal initiatives in this area. In 2014 The Department of Education approved an advanced Health Informatics Undergraduate program that was submitted by The University of South Alabama. The program is designed to provide specific Health Informatics education, and is the only program in the country with a Health Informatics Lab. The program is housed in The School of Computing in Shelby Hall, a recently complet ed 50 million state of the art teaching facility. The University of South Alabama awarded David L. Loeser on May 10, 2014 with the first Health Informatics degree. The program currently is scheduled to have 100 students awarded by 2016. The Certification Commission for Healthcare Information Technology CCHIT, a private nonprofit group, was funded in 2005 by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services to develop a set of standards for electronic health records EHR and supporting networks, and certify vendors who meet them. In July 2006, CCHIT released its first list of 22 certified ambulatory EHR products, in two different announcements. 69  Harvard Medical School added a department of biomedical informatics in 2015. 70  The University of Cincinnati in partnership with Cincinnati Childrens Hospital Medical Center created a biomedical informatics BMI Graduate certificate program and in 2015 began a BMI PhD program. 71  72  73  The joint program allows for researchers and students to observe the impact their work has on patient care directly as discoveries are translated from bench to bedside. Europe  edit  Further information European Federation for Medical Informatics The European Unions Member States are committed to sharing their best practices and experiences to create a European eHealth Area, thereby improving access to and quality health care at the same time as stimulating growth in a promising new industrial sector. The European eHealth Action Plan plays a fundamental role in the European Unions strategy. Work on this initiative inv olves a collaborative approach among several parts of the Commission services. 74  75  The European Institute for Health Records is involved in the promotion of high quality electronic health record systems in the European Union . 76  UK  edit  There are different models of health informatics delivery in each of the home countries England, Scotland, Northern Ireland and Wales but some bodies like UKCHIP 77  see below operate for those in and for all the home countries and beyond. England  edit  NHS informatics in England was contracted out to several vendors for national health informatics solutions under the National Programme for Information Technology NPfIT label in the early to mid-2000s, under the auspices of NHS Connecting for Health part of the Health and Social Care Information Centre as of 1 April 2013. NPfIT originally divided the country into five regions, with strategic systems integration contracts awarded to one of several Local Service Providers LSP. The various specific technical solutions were required to con nect securely with the NHS Spine, a system designed to broker data between different systems and care settings. NPfIT fell significantly behind schedule and its scope and design were being revised in real time, exacerbated by media and political lambasting of the Programmes spend past and projected against the proposed budget. In 2010 a consultation was launched as part of the new ConservativeLiberal Democrat Coalition Governments White Paper Liberating the NHS. This initiative provided little in the way of innovative thinking, primarily re-stating existing strategies within the proposed new context of the Coalitions vision for the NHS. The degree of computerization in NHS secondary care was quite high before NPfIT, and the programme stagna ted further development of the install base  the original NPfIT regional approach provided neither a single, nationwide solution nor local health community agility or autonomy to purchase systems, but instead tried to deal with a hinterland in the middle. Almost all general practices in England and Wales are computerized under the GP Systems of Choice GPSoC 78  programme, and patients have relatively extensive computerized primary care clinical records. System choice is the responsibility of individual general practices and while there is no single, standardized GP system, GPSoC sets relatively rigid minimum standards of performance and functionality for vendors to adhere to. Interoperation between primary and secondary care systems is rather primitive. It is hoped that a focus on interworking for interfacing and integration standards will stimulate synergy between primary and secondary care in sharing necessary information to support the care of individuals. Notable successes to date are in the electronic requesting and viewing of test results, and in some areas, GPs have access to digital x-ray images from secondary care systems. Scotland  edit  Scotland has an approach to the central connection underway which is more advanced than the English one in some ways. Scotland has the GPASS system whose source code is owned by the State, and controlled and developed by NHS Scotland. GPASS was accepted in 1984. It has been provided free to all GPs in Scotland but has developed poorly.  citation needed  Discussion of open sourcing it as a remedy is occurring. Wales  edit  Wales has a dedicated Health Informatics function that supports NHS Wales in leading on the new integrated digital information services and promoting Health Informatics as a career. Netherlands  edit  In the Netherlands, health informatics is currently a priority for research and implementation. The Netherlands Federation of University medical centers NFU 79  has created the Citrienfonds , which includes the programs eHealth and Registration at the Source. 80  The Netherlands also has the national organizations Society for Healthcare Informatics VMBI 81  and Nictiz, the national center for standardization and eHealth. 82  Emerging Directions European R D  edit  The European Commissions preference, as exemplified in the 5th Framework 83  as well as currently pursued pilot projects, 84  is for FreeLibre and Open Source Software FLOSS for healthcare. Another stream of research currently focuses on aspects of big data in health information systems. For background information on data-related aspects in health informatics see, e.g., the book Biomedical Informatics 85  by Andreas Holzinger. Asia and Oceania  edit  In Asia and Australia-New Zealand, the regional group called the Asia Pacific Association for Medical Informatics APAMI 86  was established in 1994 and now consists of more than 15 member regions in the Asia Pacific Region. Australia  edit  The Australasian College of Health Informatics ACHI is the professional association for health informatics in the Asia-Pacific region. It represents the interests of a broad range of clinical and non-clinical professionals working within the health informatics sphere through a commitment to quality, standards and ethical practice. 87  ACHI is an academic institutional member of the International Medical Informatics Association IMIA 88  and a full member of the Australian Council of Professions. 89  ACHI is a sponsor of the e-Journal for Health Informatics, 90  an indexed and peer-reviewed professional journal. ACHI has also supported the  Australian Health Informatics Education Council  AHIEC since its founding in 2009. 91  Although there are a number of health informatics organizations in Australia, the Health Informatics Society of Australia 92  HISA is regarded as the major umbrella group and is a member of the International Medical Informatics Association IMIA. Nursing informaticians were the driving force behind the formation of HISA, which is now a company limited by guarantee of the members. The membership comes from across the informatics spectrum that is from students to corporate affiliates. HISA has a number of branches Queensland, New South Wales, Victoria and Western Australia as well as special interest groups suc h as nursing NIA, pathology, aged and community care, industry and medical imaging Conrick, 2006. China  edit  After 20 years, China performed a successful transition from its planned economy to a socialist market economy . Along this change, Chinas healthcare system also experienced a significant reform to follow and adapt to this historical revolution. In 2003, the data released from Ministry of Health of the Peoples Republic of China MoH, indicated that the national healthcare-involved expenditure was up to RMB 662.33 billion totally, which accounted for about 5.56 of nationwide gross domestic products. Before the 1980s, the entire healthcare costs were covered in central government annual budget. Since that, the construct of healthcare-expended supporters started to change gradually. Most of the expenditure was contributed by health insurance schemes and private spending, which cor responded to 40 and 45 of total expenditure, respectively. Meanwhile, the financially governmental contribution was decreased to 10 only. On the other hand, by 2004, up to 296,492 healthcare facilities were recorded in statistic summary of MoH, and an average of 2.4 clinical beds per 1000 people were mentioned as well. 93  In China  edit  Proportion of nationwide hospitals with HIS in China by 2004 Along with the development of information technology since the 1990s, healthcare providers realized that the information could generate significant benefits to improve their services by computerized cases and data, for instance of gaining the information for directing patient care and assessing the best patient care for specific clinical conditions. Therefore, substantial resou rces were collected to build Chinas own health informatics system. Most of these resources were arranged to construct hospital information system HIS, which was aimed to minimize unnecessary waste and repetition, subsequently to promote the efficiency and quality-control of healthcare. 94  By 2004, China had successfully spread HIS through approximately 3540 of nationwide hospitals. 95  However, the dispersion of hospital-owned HIS varies critically. In the east part of China, over 80 of hospitals constructed HIS, in northwest of China the equivalent was no more than 20. Moreover, all of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention CDC above rural level, approximately 80 of healthcare organisations above the rural level and 27 of hospitals over town level have the ability to perform the transmission of reports about real-time epidemic situation through public health information system and to analysis infectious diseases by dynamic statistics. 96  China has four tiers in its healthcare system. The first tier is street health and workplace clinics and these are cheaper than hospitals in terms of medical billing and act as prevention centers. The second tier is district and enterprise hospitals along with specialist clinics and these provide the second level of care. The third tier is provisional and municipal general hosp itals and teaching hospitals which provided the third level of care. In a tier of its own is the national hospitals which are governed by the Ministry of Health. China has been greatly improving its health informatics since it finally opened its doors to the outside world and joined the World Trade Organization WTO. In 2001, it was reported that China had 324,380 medical inst itutions and the majority of those were clinics. The reason for that is that clinics are prevention centers and Chinese people like using traditional Chinese medicine as opposed to Western medicine and it usually works for the minor cases. China has also been improving its higher education in regards to health informatics. At the end of 2002, there were 77 medical universities and medical colleges. There were 48 university medical colleges which offered bachelor, master, and doctorate degrees in medicine. There were 21 higher medical specialty institutions that offered diploma degrees so in total, there were 147 higher medical and educational institutions. Since joining the WTO, China has been working hard to improve its education system and bring it up to international standards. 97  SARS played a large role in China quickly improving its healthcare system. Back in 2003, there was an outbreak of SARS and that made China hurry to spread HIS or Hospital Information System and more than 80 of hospitals had HIS. China had been comparing itself to Koreas healthcare system and figuring out how it can better its own system. There was a study done that surveyed six hospitals in China that had HIS. The results were that doctors didnt use computers as much so it was concluded that it wasnt used as much for clinical practice than it was for administrative purposes. The survey asked if the hospitals created any websites and it was concluded that only four of them had created websites and that three had a third-party company create it fo r them and one was created by the hospital staff. In conclusion, all of them agreed or strongly agreed that providing health information on the Internet should be utilized. 98  Standards in China  edit  Collected information at different times, by different participants or systems could frequently lead to issues of misunderstanding, dis-comparing or dis-exchanging. To design an issues-minor system, healthcare providers realized that certain standards were the basis for sharing information and interoperability, however a system lacking standards would be a large impediment to i nterfere the improvement of corresponding information systems. Given that the standardization for health informatics depends on the authorities, standardization events must be involved with government and the subsequently relevant funding and supports were critical. In 2003, the Ministry of Health released the Development Lay-out of National Health Informatics 20032010 99  indicating the identification of standardization for health informatics which is combining adoption of international standards and development of national standards. In China, the establishment of standardization was initially facilitated with the development of vocabulary, classification and coding , which is conducive to reserve and transmit information for premium management at national level. By 2006, 55 international domestic standards of vocabulary, classification and coding have served in hospital information system. In 2003, the 10th revision of the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems  ICD-10  and the ICD-10 Clinical Modification ICD-10-CM were adopted as standards for diagnostic classification and acute care procedure classification. Simultaneously, the International Classification of Primary Care ICPC were translated and tested in China s local applied environment. 100  Another coding standard, named Logical Observation Identifiers Names and Codes LOINC, was applied to serve as general identifiers for clinical observation in hospitals. Personal identifier codes were widely employed in different information systems, involving name, sex, nationality, family relationship, educational level and job occupation. However, these codes within different systems are inconsistent, when sharing between different regions. Consideri ng this large quantity of vocabulary, classification and coding standards between different jurisdictions, the healthcare provider realized that using multiple systems could generate issues of resource wasting and a non-conflicting national level standard was beneficial and necessary. Therefore, in late 2003, the health informatics group in Ministry of Health released three pro jects to deal with issues of lacking national health information standards, which were the Chinese National Health Information Framework and Standardization, the Basic Data Set Standards of Hospital Information System and the Basic Data Set Standards of Public Health Information System. Objectives of Chinese National Health Information Framework and Standardisation 1. Establish national health information framework and identify in what areas standards and guidelines are required 2. Identify the classes, relationships and attributes of national health information framework. Produce a conceptual health data model to cover the scope of the health information framework 3. Create logical data model for specific domains, depicting the logical data entities, the data attributes, and the relationships between the entities according to the conceptual health data model 4. Establish uniform represent standard for data elements according to the data entities and their attributes in conceptual data model and logical data model 5. Circulate the completed health information framework and health data model to the partnership members for review and acceptance 6. Develop a process to maintain and refine the China model and to align with and influence international health data models 93  Comparison between Chinas EHR Standard and Segments of the ASTM E 1384 Standard  edit  Recently, researchers from local universities evaluated the performance of Chinas Electronic Health Record EHR Standard compared with the American Society for Testing and Materials Standard Practice for Content and Structure of Electronic Health Records in the United States  ASTM E 1384 Standard. 101  ChinasEHR standard ASTM E 1384 standard  H.01 Document identifier, H.02 Service object identifier, H.03 Demographics, H.04 Contact person, H.05 Address, H.06 Contacts  Seg1 DemographicAdministrative, Seg14A AdministrativeDiagnostic Summary  H.07 Medical insurance  H.08 Healthcare institution, H.09 Healthcare practitioner  Seg4 ProviderPractitioners  H.10 Event summary  Seg5 Problem List, Seg14A AdministrativeDiagnostic Summary  S.01 Chief complaints  Seg14B Chief Complaint Present IllnessTrauma Care  S.02 Physical exam  Seg9 AssessmentsExams  S.03 Present illness history  Seg14B Chief Complaint Present IllnessTrauma Care  S.04 Past medical history  Seg5 Problem List, Seg6 Immunizations, Seg7 Exposure to Hazardous Substances, Seg8 FamilyPrenatalCumulative HealthMedicalDental Nursing History  S.05 Specific Exam, S.06 Lab data  Seg11 Diagnostic Tests  S.07 Diagnoses  Seg5 Problem List, Seg14A AdministrativeDiagnostic Summary  S.08 Procedures  Seg14E Procedures  S.09 Medications  Seg12 Medications  S.10 Caretreatment plans  Seg2 Legal Agreements, Seg10 CareTreatment Plans and Orders, Seg13 Scheduled AppointmentsEvents  S.11 Assessments  Seg9 AssessmentsExams  S.12 Encountersepisodes notes  Seg14C Progress NotesClinical Course, Seg14D Therapies, Seg14F Disposition  S.13 Financial information  Seg3 Financial  S.14 Nursing service  Seg8 FamilyPrenatalCumulative HealthMedicalDental Nursing History, Seg14D Therapies  S.15 Health guidance  Seg10 CareTreatment Plans and Orders  S.16 Four diagnostic methods in Traditional Chinese medicine  Seg11 Diagnostic Tests The table above demonstrates details of this comparison which indicates certain domains of improvement for future revisions of EHR Standard in China. Meticulously, these deficiencies are listed in the following. The lack of supporting on privacy and security. The ISOTS 18308 specifies The EHR must support the ethical and legal use of personal information, in accordance with established privacy principles and frameworks, which may be culturally or jurisdictionally specific  ISO 18308 Health Informatics-Requirements for an Electronic Health Record Architecture, 2004. However this Chinas EHR Standard did not achieve any of the fifteen requirements in the subclass of privacy and security. The shortage of supporting on different types of data and reference. Considering only ICD-9 is referenced as Chinas external international coding systems, other similar systems, such as SNOMED CT in clinical terminology presentation, cannot be considered as familiar for Chinese specialists, which could lead to internationally information-sharing deficiency. The lack of more generic and extensible lower level data structures. Chinas large and complex EHR Standard was constructed for all medical domains. However, the specific and time-frequent attributes of clinical data elements, value sets and templates identified that this once-for-all purpose cannot lead to practical consequence. 102  Hong Kong  edit  In Hong Kong a computerized patient record system called the Clinical Management System CMS has been developed by the Hospital Authority since 1994. This system has been deployed at all the sites of the authority 40 hospitals and 120 clinics. It is used for up to 2 million transactions daily by 30,000 clinical staff. The comprehensive records of 7 million patients are available on-line in the electronic patient record ePR, with data integrated from all sites. Since 2004 radiology image viewing has been added to the ePR, with radiography images from any HA site being available as part of the ePR. The Hong Kong Hospital Authority placed particular attention to the governance of clinical systems development, with input from hundreds of clinicians being incorporated through a structured process. The health informatics section in the Hospital Authority 103  has a close relationship with the information technology department and clinicians to develop healthcare systems for the organization to support the service to all public hospitals and clinics in the region. The Hong Kong Society of Medical Informatics HKSMI was established in 1987 to promote the use of information technology in healthcare. The eHealth Consortium has been formed to bring together clinicians from both the private and public sectors, medical informatics professionals and the IT industry to further promote IT in healthcare in Hong Kong. 104  India  edit  Main article Indian Association for Medical Informatics eHCF School of Medical Informatics 105  eHealth-Care Foundation 106  Malaysia  edit  Since 2010, the Ministry of Health MoH has been working on the Malaysian Health Data Warehouse MyHDW project. MyHDW aims to meet the diverse needs of timely health information provision and management, and acts as a platform for the standardization and integration of health data from a variety of sources Health Informatics Centre, 2013. The Ministry has embarked on introducing the electronic Hospital Information Systems HIS in several public hospitals including Se rdang Hospital, Selayang Hospital and University Kebangsaan Malaysia Medical Centre UKMMC under the Ministry of Higher Education MOHE. A hospital information system HIS is a comprehensive, integrated information system designed to manage the administrative, financial and clinical aspects of a hospital. As an area of medical informatics, the aim of hospital information system is to achieve the best possible support of patient care and administration by electronic data processing. HIS plays a vital role in planning, initiating, organizing and controlling the operations of the subsystems of the hospital and thus provides a synergistic organization in the process. New Zealand  edit  Health informatics is taught at five New Zealand universities. The most mature and established programme has been offered for over a decade at Otago. 107  Health Informatics New Zealand HINZ, is the national organisation that advocates for health informatics. HINZ organises a conference every year and also publishes a journal- Healthcare Informatics Review Online . Saudi Arabia  edit  The Saudi Association for Health Information SAHI was established in 2006 108  to work under direct supervision of King Saud bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences to practice public activities, develop theoretical and applicable knowledge, and provide scientific and applicable studies. 109  Post-Soviet countries  edit  The Russian Federation  edit  The Russian healthcare system is based on the principles of the Soviet healthcare system, which was oriented on mass prophylaxis, prevention of infection and epidemic diseases, vaccination and immunization of the population on a socially protected basis. The current government healthcare system consists of several directions Preventive health care Primary health care Specialized medical care Obstetrical and gynecologic medical care Pediatric medical care Surgery Rehabilitation Health resort treatment One of the main issues of the post-Soviet medical health care system was the absence of the united system providing optimization of work for medical institutes with one, single database and structured appointment schedule and hence hours-long lines. Efficiency of medical workers might have been also doubtful because of the paperwork administrating or lost book records. Along with the development of the information systems IT and healthcare departments in Moscow agreed on design of a system that would improve public services of health care institutes. Tackling the issues appearing in the existing system, the Moscow Government ordered that the design of a system would provide simplified electronic booking to public clinics and automate the work of medical workers on the first level. The system designed for that purposes was called EMIAS United Medical Information and Analysis System and presents an electronic health record EHR with the majority of other services set in the system that manages the flow of patients, contains outpatient card integrated in the system, and provides an opportunity to manage consolidated managerial accounting and personalized list of medical help. Besides that, the system contains information about availability of the medical institutions and various doctors. The implementation of the system started in 2013 with the organization of one computerized database for all patients in the city, including a front-end for the users. EMIAS was implemented in Moscow and the region and it is planned that the project should extend to most parts of the country. Law  edit  Further information Health law Health informatics law deals with evolving and sometimes complex legal principles as they apply to information technology in health-related fields. It addresses the privacy, ethical and operational issues that invariably arise when electronic tools, information and media are used in health care delivery. Health Informatics Law also applies to all matters that involve information technology, health c are and the interaction of information. It deals with the circumstances under which data and records are shared with other fields or areas that support and enhance patient care. As many healthcare systems are making an effort to have patient records more readily available to them via the internet, it is important that providers implement security standards in order to ensure that the patients information is safe. They have to be able to assure confidentiality, integrity, and security of the people, process, and technology. Since there is also the poss ibility of payments being made through this system, it is vital that this aspect of their private information will also be protected through cryptography. The use of technology in health care settings has become popular and this trend is expected to continue. Various healthcare facilities had instigated different kinds of health information technology systems in the provision of patient care, such as electronic health records EHRs, computerized charting, etc. 110  The growing popularity of health information technology systems and the escalation in the amount of health information that can be exchanged and transferred electronically increased the risk of potential infringement in patients privacy and confidentiality. 111  This concern triggered the establishment of strict measures by both policymakers and individual facility to ensure patient privacy and confidentiality. One of the federal laws enacted to safeguard patients health information medical record, billing information, treatment plan, etc. and to guarantee patients privacy is the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 or HIPAA. 112  HIPAA gives patients the autonomy and control over their own health records. 112  Furthermore, according to the U.S. Department of Health  Human Services n.d., this law enables patients to do the following 112  Allows patients to view their own health records Permits patients to request for a copy of their own medical records Modify any incorrect health information Provides patients with the right to know who has access to their health record Grants patients the right to request who can and cannot viewaccess their health information Health and medical informatics journals  edit  See also List of medical and health informatics journals Impact factors of scholarly journals publishing digital health ehealth, mhealth work Computers and Biomedical Research , published in 1967, was one of the first dedicated journals to health informatics. Other early journals included Computers and Medicine , published by the American Medical Association Journal of Clinical Computing , published by Gallagher Printing Journal of Medical Systems , published by Plenum Press and MD Computing , published by Springer-Verlag. In 1984, Lippincott published the first nursing-specific journal, titled Journal Computers in Nursing , which is now known as Computers Informatics Nursing  CIN . 113  As of September 7, 2016, there are roughly 235 informatics journals listed in the National Library of Medicine NLM catalog of journals. 114  The Journal Citation Reports for 2018 gives the top three journals in medical informatics as the Journal of Medical Internet Research  impact factor of 4.945, JMIR mHealth and uHealth 4.301 and the Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 4.292. 115  See also  edit  Medicine portal Related concepts  edit  Bioinformatics Clinical documentation improvement Continuity of care record CCR Diagnosis-related groups eHealth Health information exchange HIE Health information management HIM Human resources for health HRH information system International Classification of Diseases ICD Neuroinformatics Nosology Nursing documentation Personal health record PHR Standardsframeworks and governance DICOM Health Metrics Network HL7 Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources FHIR Integrating the Healthcare Enterprise Omaha System openEHR SNOMED xDT Algorithms Datafly algorithm References  edit   Nadri H, Rahimi B, Timpka T, Sedghi S August 2017. The Top 100 Articles in the Medical Informatics a Bibliometric Analysis. Journal of Medical Systems . 41 10 150. doi  10.1007s10916-017-0794-4 . PMID   28825158 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  NLM Definition . NLM .  Odonoghue J, Herbert J 2012. Data management within mHealth environments Patient sensors, mobile devices, and databases. Journal of Data and Information Quality . 4 1 5.  Mettler T, Raptis DA June 2012. What constitutes the field of health information systems Fostering a systematic framework and research agenda. Health Informatics Journal . 18 2 14756. doi  10.11771460458212452496 . PMID   22733682 .  Popularity of usage of software in homeopathy is shown in example video of homeopathic repertorisation Shilpa Bhouraskar, Working quick acute cases on Homeopathic Software YouTube  ODonoghue, John et al. 2011. Modified early warning scorecard the role of datainformation quality within the decision making process. Electronic Journal Information Systems Evaluation . 14 1.  35.240.80 IT applications in health care technology . ISO . Retrieved 2008-06-15 .  Fraser, Ross. ISO 27799 Security management in health using ISOIEC 17799 PDF . Archived from the original PDF on 2008-12-17 . Retrieved 2008-06-15 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   American Society of Health-System Pharmacists 2007. ASHP statement on the pharmacists role in informatics. American Journal of Health-System Pharmacy . 64 2 20003. doi  10.2146ajhp060364 .  ASHP statement on the pharmacy technicians role in pharmacy informatics. American Journal of Health-System Pharmacy . 71 3 24750. February 2014. doi  10.1093ajhp71.3.247 . PMID   24429021 .  Troiano D 1999. A primer on pharmacy information systems. Journal of Healthcare Information Management . 13 3 4152. PMID   10787600 .  Bates DW 2000. Using information technology to reduce rates of medication errors in hospitals . British Medical Journal . 320 7237 78891. doi  10.1136bmj.320.7237.788 . PMC   1117776 . PMID   10720369 .  Frye, Julie 2012. Computers in pharmaceutical management. MDS  3 Managing Access to Medicines and Health Technologies 3rd ed.. Arlington, Virginia Management Sciences for Health. pp.  97396.  Holler J January 14, 2013. The role of information technology in advancing pharmacy practice models to improve patient safety. Pharmacy Times  16.  Gardner RM, Overhage JM, Steen EB, Munger BS, Holmes JH, Williamson JJ, Detmer DE 2009. Core content for the subspecialty of clinical informatics . Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association . 16 2 1537. doi  10.1197jamia.M3045 . PMC   2649328 . PMID   19074296 .  Safran C, Shabot MM, Munger BS, Holmes JH, Steen EB, Lumpkin JR, Detmer DE 2009. Program requirements for fellowship education in the subspecialty of clinical informatics . Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association . 16 2 15866. doi  10.1197jamia.M3046 . PMC   2649323 . PMID   19074295 .  Clinical Informatics 2014 Diplomats . American Board of Preventive Medicine . December 2013. Archived from the original on 8 January 2014 . Retrieved 7 January 2014 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Clinical Informatics Board Certification PDF . American Board of Preventive Medicine . 1 January 2013. Archived from the original PDF on 29 December 2013 . Retrieved 7 January 2014 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   a b MacKenzie SL, Wyatt MC, Schuff R, Tenenbaum JD, Anderson N June 2012. Practices and perspectives on building integrated data repositories results from a 2010 CTSA survey . Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association . 19 e1 e11924. doi  10.1136amiajnl-2011-000508 . PMC   3392848 . PMID   22437072 .  a b Wade TD, Zelarney PT, Hum RC, McGee S, Batson DH December 2014. Using patient lists to add value to integrated data repositories . Journal of Biomedical Informatics . 52  727. doi  10.1016j.jbi.2014.02.010 . PMC   4134416 . PMID   24534444 .  a b c d Nadkarni, Prakash 2016. Clinical Data Repositories Warehouses, Registries, and the Use of Standards . Clinical Research Computing A Practitioners Handbook . Academic Press. pp.  17385. doi  10.1016B978-0-12-803130-8.00009-9 . ISBN   978-0128031452 .  a b Huser V, Cimino JJ 2014. Dont take your EHR to heaven, donate it to science legal and research policies for EHR post mortem . Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association . 21 1 812. doi  10.1136amiajnl-2013-002061 . PMC   3912713 . PMID   23966483 .  Huser V, DeFalco FJ, Schuemie M, Ryan PB, Shang N, Velez M, Park RW, Boyce RD, Duke J, Khare R, Utidjian L, Bailey C 2016. Multisite Evaluation of a Data Quality Tool for Patient-Level Clinical Data Sets . EGEMs . 4 1 1239. doi  10.130632327-9214.1239 . PMC   5226382 . PMID   28154833 .  Huser, V Shmueli-Blumberg, D 2018. Data sharing platforms for de-identified data from human clinical trials. Clinical Trials . 15 4 413423. doi  10.11771740774518769655 . PMID   29676586 .  httpswww.projectdatasphere.org  httpsimmport.niaid.nih.gov  httpsClinicalStudyDataRequest.com  Butte AJ June 2009. Translational bioinformatics applications in genome medicine . Genome Medicine . 1 6 64. doi  10.1186gm64 . PMC   2703873 . PMID   19566916 .  Kann MG January 2010. Advances in translational bioinformatics computational approaches for the hunting of disease genes . Briefings in Bioinformatics . 11 1 96110. doi  10.1093bibbbp048 . PMC   2810112 . PMID   20007728 .  Lussier YA, Butte AJ, Hunter L June 2010. Current methodologies for translational bioinformatics . Journal of Biomedical Informatics . 43 3 3557. doi  10.1016j.jbi.2010.05.002 . PMC   2894568 . PMID   20470899 .  Sarkar IN February 2010. Biomedical informatics and translational medicine . Journal of Translational Medicine . 8  22. doi  10.11861479-5876-8-22 . PMC   2837642 . PMID   20187952 .  Embi PJ, Payne PR 2009. Clinical research informatics challenges, opportunities and definition for an emerging domain . Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association . 16 3 31627. doi  10.1197jamia.m3005 . PMC   2732242 . PMID   19261934 .  a b c d e Tenenbaum JD February 2016. Translational Bioinformatics Past, Present, and Future . Genomics, Proteomics  Bioinformatics . 14 1 3141. doi  10.1016j.gpb.2016.01.003 . PMC   4792852 . PMID   26876718 .  AMIA website  Greengard, Samuel 1 February 2013. A New Model for Healthcare PDF . Communications of the ACM . 56 2 1719. doi  10.11452408776.2408783 . Retrieved 12 February 2013 .  permanent dead link   Hoey J, Poupart P, von Bertoldi A, Craig T, Boutilier C, Mihailidis A 2010. Automated Handwashing Assistance For Persons With Dementia Using Video and a Partially Observable Markov Decision Process. Computer Vision and Image Understanding CVIU . 114 5 50319. CiteSeerX   10.1.1.160.8351 . doi  10.1016j.cviu.2009.06.008 .  Mihailidis A, Boger JN, Craig T, Hoey J November 2008. The COACH prompting system to assist older adults with dementia through handwashing an efficacy study . BMC Geriatrics . 8  28. doi  10.11861471-2318-8-28 . PMC   2588599 . PMID   18992135 .  Peter J. Embi., and Philip R. O. Payne. 2009. Clinical research informatics challenges, opportunities and definition for an emerging domain. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association JAMIA. 2009 MayJun 16331617. doi  10.1197 .  Richesson, Rachel L., and James E. Andrews. 2012. Clinical research informatics. London Springer.  Huser V, Sastry C, Breymaier M, Idriss A, Cimino JJ October 2015. Standardizing data exchange for clinical research protocols and case report forms An assessment of the suitability of the Clinical Data Interchange Standards Consortium CDISC Operational Data Model ODM . Journal of Biomedical Informatics . 57  8899. doi  10.1016j.jbi.2015.06.023 . PMC   4714951 . PMID   26188274 .  a b The History of Health Informatics . Health Informatics, Nursing Informatics and Health Information Management Degrees . University of Illinois at Chicago .  a b c NYU Graduate Training Program in Biomedical Informatics BMI A Brief History of Biomedical Informatics as a Discipline . www.nyuinformatics.org . NYU Langone Medical Center. Archived from the original on 2010-12-12 . Retrieved 11 November 2010 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   Robson S, Baek OK 2009. The engines of Hippocrates From the Dawn of Medicine to Medical and Pharmaceutical Informatics . Hoboken, NJ John Wiley  Sons. ISBN   978-0470289532 .  Haux R September 2010. Medical informatics past, present, future . International Journal of Medical Informatics . 79 9 599610. doi  10.1016j.ijmedinf.2010.06.003 . PMID   20615752 .  Sittig DF, Ash JS, Ledley RS 2006. The story behind the development of the first whole-body computerized tomography scanner as told by Robert S. Ledley . Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association . 13 5 4659. doi  10.1197jamia.M2127 . PMC   1561796 . PMID   16799115 .  a b November, Joseph 2012. Biomedical Computing Digitizing Life in the United States . Baltimore Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN   978-1421404684 .  Pyle KI, Lobel RW, Beck JR 1988. Citation analysis of the field of medical decision making update, 1959-1985 . Medical Decision Making . 8 3 15564. doi  10.11770272989X8800800302 . PMID   3294550 .  Walking Patterns of Normal Men, JBS, 1964 . Archived from the original on 2012-01-18 . Retrieved 2012-06-18 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   MGH  Laboratory of Computer Science . Archived from the original on 2014-08-02 . Retrieved 2009-04-16 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   Edwin D. Reilly 2003. Milestones in Computer Science and Information Technology . Greenwood Press . p.  161. ISBN   978-1573565219 .  Collen, Morris F. 1995. A History of Medical Informatics in the United States, 1950 to 1990 . Bethesda, MD American Medical Informatics Association. ISBN   978-0964774308 .  Dr. Morris Collen Tribute . Kaiser Permanente. 2008. Archived from the original on February 2, 2014 . Retrieved May 21, 2012 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Historical Videos of the founding of the Division of Clinical Informatics at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center  Patient power through records . Boston Globe. 2017 . Retrieved February 2, 2017 .  PaperChase A Computer Program to Search the Medical Literature. Proc Annu Symp Comput Appl Med Care Proc Annu Symp Comput Appl Med Care . November 1982. pp.  10451051. PMC   2580387 .  Safran, C JulyAugust 2002. Presentation of Morris F. Collen Award to Professors Howard Bleich and Warner Slack . J Am Med Inform Assoc . 9 4 406408. doi  10.1197jamia.M1080 . PMC   403635 . PMID   12087123 .  Zahabi M, Kaber DB, Swangnetr M August 2015. Usability and Safety in Electronic Medical Records Interface Design A Review of Recent Literature and Guideline Formulation. Human Factors . 57 5 80534. doi  10.11770018720815576827 . PMID   25850118 . CS1 maint uses authors parameter  link   Zahabi M, Kaber DB, Swangnetr M August 2015. Usability and Safety in Electronic Medical Records Interface Design A Review of Recent Literature and Guideline Formulation. Human Factors . 57 5 80534. doi  10.11770018720815576827 . PMID   25850118 .  Patton GA, Gardner RM 1999. Medical informatics education the University of Utah experience . Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association . 6 6 45765. doi  10.1136jamia.1999.0060457 . PMC   61389 . PMID   10579604 .  Informatics Nursing Certification Eligibility Criteria , American Nurses Credentialing Center, accessed June 18, 2016  Certification Guide , American Board of Imaging Informatics, accessed June 18, 2016,  Knowledge Domains , American Health Information Management Association, accessed June 18, 2016,  Missed Opportunities The Labor Market in Health Informatics, 2014 , Burning Glass Technologies, December 2014 accessed June 18, 2016  AHIMA Certification Activities 2015 , American Health Information Management Association, accessed June 18, 2016  Health Informatics for Low- and Middle-Income Countries Short Course for Health Information System Professions  MEASURE Evaluation . www.measureevaluation.org . Retrieved 2018-10-04 .  Priest, Lisa 2008-02-18. Your medical chart, just a mouse click away . The Globe and Mail . Toronto.  Head of eHealth Ontario is fired amid contracts scandal, gets big package . CBC News . 2009-06-07 . Retrieved 2009-08-26 .  Executive Order 13335  Certification Commission for Healthcare Information Technology July 18, 2006 CCHIT Announces First Certified Electronic Health Record Products . Retrieved July 26, 2006.  httpscbmi.med.harvard.edu  httpswww.cincinnatichildrens.orgresearchdivisionsbbmi  httpmed.uc.edubmi  httpmed.uc.edubmigrad  European eHealth Action Plan  European eHealth Action Plan i2010  Electronic Health Records for Europe . European Space Agency . 2005 . Retrieved 2009-01-13 .  UKCHIP  GP Systems of Choice GPSoC  httpwww.nfu.nlenglishabout-the-nfu  httpwww.nfu.nlpatientenzorgcitrien  httpswww.efmi.orgaboutefmi-countriesnetherlands  httpswww.nictiz.nlover-nictizenglish  Cordis FP5web  European Patient Smart Open Services  Holzinger, A. 2012. Biomedical Informatics, Lecture Notes to LV 444.152. Books on Demand, ISBN   978-3848222193 .  Asia Pacific Association of Medical Informatics .  Australasian College of Health Informatics . Retrieved 3 May 2010 . Australasian College of Health Informatics  International Medical Informatics Association  Academic Institutional Members . Australian College of Health Informatics. 12 August 2009. Archived from the original on 6 July 2010 . Retrieved 22 February 2010 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   ACHI Memberships ACHI memberships Professions Australia  eJHI Journal of Health Informatics Archived 2011-07-23 at the Wayback Machine open access journal  Australian Health Informatics Education Council AHIEC AHIEC Auspicing Organisations  Health Informatics Society of Australia Ltd . Retrieved 3 April 2010 .  a b Zhang Y, Xu Y, Shang L, Rao K August 2007. An investigation into health informatics and related standards in China. International Journal of Medical Informatics . 76 8 61420. doi  10.1016j.ijmedinf.2006.05.003 . PMID   16793329 .  Guo J, Takada A, Niu T, He M, Tanaka K, Sato J, Suzuki M, Takahashi K, Daimon H, Suzuki T, Nakashima Y, Araki K, Yoshihara H October 2005. Enhancement of CLAIM clinical accounting information for a localized Chinese version. Journal of Medical Systems . 29 5 46371. doi  10.1007s10916-005-6103-7 . PMID   16180482 .  Wang XJ, Hu J, Wang K, Yu H, Luo M, Lei WY November 2004. Setting-up and preliminary performance of the interactive teleradiological conference system based on virtual private network. Chinese Medical Journal . 117 11 17358. PMID   15569497 .  Rao KQ, Wang CY, Hu JP 2005. Introduction of the National Public Health Emergency Response Information Systems Project. Chinese Journal of Integrative Medicine . 1  25.  Health Informatics Journal PDF .  The Current Status of Hospital Information Systems in Yanbian, China PDF .  Development Layout of National Health Information . Retrieved 2017-11-03 .  Kalra D, Beale T, Heard S 2005. The openEHR Foundation. Studies in Health Technology and Informatics . 115  15373. PMID   16160223 .  Xu W, Guan Z, Cao H, Zhang H, Lu M, Li T August 2011. Analysis and evaluation of the Electronic Health Record standard in China a comparison with the American national standard ASTM E 1384. International Journal of Medical Informatics . 80 8 55561. doi  10.1016j.ijmedinf.2011.05.003 . PMID   21680236 .  Lvy PP, Duch L, Darago L, Dorlans Y, Toubiana L, Vibert JF, Flahault A 2005. ICPCview visualizing the International Classification of Primary Care. Studies in Health Technology and Informatics . 116  6238. PMID   16160327 .  Health informatics section in Hong Kong Hospital Authority  eHealth Consortium Archived 2006-06-28 at the Wayback Machine  eHCF School of Medical Informatics  eHealth-Care Foundation  Kerr K, Cullen R, Duke J, Holt A 2006. Health Informatics Capability Development In New Zealand - A Report to the Tertiary Education Commission PDF . Archived from the original PDF on 2008-09-20 . Retrieved 2009-01-08 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Medical Pharmaceutical Information Association MedPharmInfo . Imia.org. 2008-05-18 . Retrieved 2010-07-29 .  permanent dead link   Saudi Association for Health Informatics SAHI . www.sahi.org.sa . Archived from the original on 2010-08-24. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Ericksen, A. 2009. Informatics the future of nursing. RN , 727, 3437.  Menachemi N, Collum TH 2011. Benefits and drawbacks of electronic health record systems . Risk Management and Healthcare Policy . 4  4755. doi  10.2147RMHP.S12985 . PMC   3270933 . PMID   22312227 .  a b c Your Rights Under HIPAA. n.d.. Text. Retrieved September 5, 2016, from httpswww.hhs.govhipaafor-individualsguidance-materials-for-consumersindex.html  Nelson, R.,  Staggers, N. 2014. Health Informatics An Interprofessional Approach. St. Louis Mosby.  NLM Catalog. 2016. Retrieved from National Center for Biotechnology Information, U.S. National Library of Medicine httpswww.ncbi.nlm.nih.govnlmcatalogcmdhistorysearch querykey3  Journals Ranked by Impact Medical Informatics. 2018 Journal Citation Reports . Web of Science Science ed.. Clarivate Analytics . 2019. Further reading  edit  Embi PJ, Payne PR 2009. Clinical research informatics challenges, opportunities and definition for an emerging domain . Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association . 16 3 31627. doi  10.1197jamia.M3005 . PMC   2732242 . PMID   19261934 . Kahn MG, Weng C June 2012. Clinical research informatics a conceptual perspective . Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association . 19 e1 e3642. doi  10.1136amiajnl-2012-000968 . PMC   3392857 . PMID   22523344 . Johnson, J. David et al. 2001. A Model for Understanding and Affecting Cancer Genetic Information Seeking , Elsevier Science Inc. Katzan  Rudick, 2012. Time to Integrate Clinical and Research Informatics. Science Translational Medicine 162FS41 Serenko A, Dohan M, Tan J 2017. Global ranking of management- and clinical-centered eHealth journals PDF . Communications of the Association for Information Systems . 41  198215. doi  10.177051CAIS.04109 . External links  edit  Wikimedia Commons has media related to Medical informatics . Health informatics at Curlie Article about informatics v t e Informatics Design Data warehouse Geoportal Informatics engineering Information management Information processing Information systems Information technology Web portal Subfields Archival informatics Astroinformatics Biodiversity informatics Bioimage informatics Bioinformatics Business informatics Cheminformatics Community informatics Computational biology Computational informatics Consumer health informatics Development informatics Disease informatics Education informatics Energy informatics Engineering Informatics Environmental informatics Forest informatics Geoinformatics Health informatics Hydroinformatics Imaging informatics Irrigation informatics Laboratory informatics Legal informatics Materials informatics Medical informatics Music informatics Neuroinformatics Pervasive Informatics Public health informatics Social informatics Technical informatics Translational research informatics Urban informatics v t e Health informatics Health information management Clinic management system Computerized physician order entry DICOM Electronic health record Health information technology Hospital information system Personal health record Regional Health Information Organization Subdisciplines Bioinformatics Computational biology Consumer health informatics Public health informatics Translational medicine Translational bioinformatics Medical classification Continuity of Care Record HRHIS ICD ISO 27799 LOINC Professional organizations American Association Australasian College Brazilian Society European Federation Indian Association International Association Other concepts Health Level 7 Personalized medicine  precision medicine List of medical and health informatics journals openEHR v t e Telemedicine Background concepts Health informatics In absentia health care Telecommunication Medical record Admission note Blue Button De-identification Electronic health record Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act Personal health record Patient participation Decision aids Doctorpatient relationship E-patient Health 2.0 Health education Knowledge translation mHealth Participative decision-making Patient Activation Measure Shared decision-making Health information on the Internet Health information on Wikipedia Online patient education PubMed Telemedicine subspecialties eHealth Remote surgery Remote therapy Tele-audiology Tele-epidemiology Teledentistry Teledermatology Telehealth Telemental health Telenursing Teleophthalmology Telepathology Telepharmacy Telepsychiatry Teleradiology Telerehabilitation Roles to play Open-source healthcare software Patient opinion leader Research participant Virtual patient v t e Nursing Levels of practice Generalists Student nurse Clinical nurse leader Licensed practical nurse Registered nurse Graduate nurse Advanced practice APNs by role Clinical nurse specialist Nurse anesthetist Nurse midwife Nurse practitioner NPs by Population Family Adult-Gerontology Pediatrics Womens health Neonatal PsychMental health Education and licensure Nightingale Pledge Associate of Science in Nursing Bachelor of Science in Nursing Diploma in Nursing Doctor of Nursing Practice Master of Science in Nursing Board of nursing Nurse Licensure Compact Nursing credentials and certifications Nursing school Nurse registry NCLEX TEAS Specialties and areas of practice Ambulatory care Cardiac Correctional nursing Critical care Dental Education Emergency Faith community Flight Forensic Geriatrics Holistic Home health Hyperbaric Legal consultation Management Matron Medical-surgical Midwifery Womens Health Care Nurse Military Neonatal Nursing informatics Obstetrics Occupational health Oncology Orthopedics Pediatrics Perianesthesia Perioperative Psychiatric and mental health Private duty Public health School Space Surgical Telenursing Travel health nursing WOCN Nursing process Nursing assessment Nursing diagnosis Nursing care plan Nursing theory Classification systems NANDA Nursing Interventions Classification Nursing Minimum Data Set NMDS Nursing Outcomes Classification By country International Nurses Day Australia  timeline  Canada Germany Hong Kong India Japan Kenya New Zealand  timeline  Pakistan Philippines Republic of Ireland South Africa Taiwan United Kingdom  history  United States  history  Category Commons WikiProject v t e Medicine Specialties and subspecialties Surgery Cardiac surgery Cardiothoracic surgery Colorectal surgery Eye surgery General surgery Neurosurgery Oral and maxillofacial surgery Orthopedic surgery Hand surgery Otolaryngology ENT Pediatric surgery Plastic surgery Reproductive surgery Surgical oncology Thoracic surgery Transplant surgery Trauma surgery Urology Andrology Vascular surgery Internal medicine Allergy   Immunology Angiology Cardiology Endocrinology Gastroenterology Hepatology Geriatrics Hematology Hospital medicine Infectious disease Nephrology Oncology Pulmonology Rheumatology Obstetrics and gynaecology Gynaecology Gynecologic oncology Maternalfetal medicine Obstetrics Reproductive endocrinology and infertility Urogynecology Diagnostic Radiology Interventional radiology Nuclear medicine Pathology Anatomical Clinical pathology Clinical chemistry Clinical immunology Cytopathology Medical microbiology Transfusion medicine Other specialties Addiction medicine Adolescent medicine Anesthesiology Dermatology Disaster medicine Diving medicine Emergency medicine Mass gathering medicine Family medicine General practice Hospital medicine Intensive care medicine Medical genetics Narcology Neurology Clinical neurophysiology Occupational medicine Ophthalmology Oral medicine Pain management Palliative care Pediatrics Neonatology Physical medicine and rehabilitation PM R Preventive medicine Psychiatry Addiction psychiatry Radiation oncology Reproductive medicine Sexual medicine Sleep medicine Sports medicine Transplantation medicine Tropical medicine Travel medicine Venereology Medical education Medical school Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery Bachelor of Medical Sciences Master of Medicine Master of Surgery Doctor of Medicine Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine MDPhD Related topics Alternative medicine Allied health Dentistry Podiatry Physiotherapy Molecular oncology Nanomedicine Personalized medicine Public health Traditional medicine Veterinary medicine Physician Chief physician History of medicine Book Category Commons Wikiproject Portal Outline Authority control GND  4038261-8 LCCN  sh89005069 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleHealth_informatics oldid912471328  Categories  Health informatics Hidden categories CS1 errors deprecated parameters All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from October 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 maint uses authors parameter Webarchive template wayback links Articles with dead external links from August 2018 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from May 2016 Citation overkill Articles tagged with the inline citation overkill template from May 2018 Articles lacking reliable references from May 2018 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2010 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2004 All articles containing potentially dated statements Wikipedia articles with style issues from August 2009 All articles with style issues Articles with unsourced statements from September 2011 Commons category link is on Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata using P373 Articles with Curlie links Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers