Electronic publishing From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Electronic publishing also referred to as e-publishing or digital publishing or online publishing  includes the digital publication of e-books , digital magazines , and the development of digital libraries and catalogues. It also includes an editorial aspect, that consists of editing books, journals or magazines that are mostly destined to be read on a screen  computer , e-reader , tablet , smartphone . 1  Contents 1 About 2 History 2.1 Digitization 2.2 Mass-scale digitization 2.3 Electronic publishing 2.4 Online edition 3 Process 4 Academic publishing 5 Copyright 6 Examples 6.1 Electronic versions of traditional media 6.2 New media 7 Business models 8 See also 9 References 10 External links About  edit  Electronic publishing has become common in scientific publishing where it has been argued that peer-reviewed scientific journals are in the process of being replaced by electronic publishing. It is also becoming common to distribute books, magazines, and newspapers to consumers through tablet reading devices , a market that is growing by millions each year, 2  generated by online vendors such as Apples iTunes bookstore, Amazons bookstore for Kindle, and books in the Google Play Bookstore. Market research suggests that half of all magazine and newspaper circulation will be via digital delivery by the end of 2015 3  and that half of all reading in the United States will be done without paper by 2015. 4  Although distribution via the Internet also known as online publishing or web publishing when in the form of a website  is nowadays strongly associated with electronic publishing, there are many non-network electronic publications such as encyclopedias on CD and DVD , as well as technical and reference publications relied on by mobile users and others without reliable and high speed access to a network. Electronic publishing is also being used in the field of test-preparation in developed as well as in developing economies for student education thus partly replacing conventional books - for it enables content and analytics combined - for the benefit of students. The use of electronic publishing for textbooks may become more prevalent with iBooks from Apple Inc. and Apples negotiation with the three largest textbook suppliers in the U.S. 5  Electronic publishing is increasingly popular in works of fiction. Electronic publishers are able to respond quickly to changing market demand, because the companies do not have to order printed books and have them delivered. E-publishing is also making a wider range of books available, including books that customers would not find in standard book retailers, due to insufficien t demand for a traditional print run. E-publication is enabling new authors to release books that would be unlikely to be profitable for traditional publishers. While the term electronic publishing is primarily used in the 2010s to refer to online and web-based publishers, the term has a history of being used to describe the development of new forms of production, distribut ion, and user interaction in regard to computer-based production of text and other interactive media . History  edit  Digitization  edit  The first digitization initiative was in 1971 in the United States, by Michael S. Hart . He was a student at the University of Illinois , and decided to launch the Project Gutenberg . 6  The project was about making literature more accessible to everyone, through internet. It took a while to develop, and in 1989 there were only 10 texts that were manually recopied on computer by Michael S. Hart himself and some volunteers. But with the appearance of the Web 1.0 in 1991 and its ability to connect documents together through static pages, the project moved quickly forward. Many more volunteers helped i n developing the project by giving access to public domain classics. 7  In the 1970s, CNRS digitized 1 000 books from diverse subjects, mostly literature but also philosophy and science, from the 1180s to present times, as to build the foundations of a big dictionary, the T rsor de la langue Franaise . This foundation of e-texts, named Frantext, was first published on CD under the name of Discotext , and then published on the web in 1998. 8  The Frantext is always enhanced, and in 2016 they registered 4 516 texts. Mass-scale digitization  edit  In 1974, Raymond Kurzweil developed a scanner that was equipped with an Omnifont software that enabled optical character recognition for numeric inputs. The digitization projects could then be a lot more ambitious since the time needed for digitization decreased considerably, and digital libraries were on the rise. All over the world, e-libraries started to emerge. The ABU  Association des Bibliophiles Universels  , was a public digital library project created by the Cnam in 1993. It was the first French digital library in the network suspended since 2002, they reproduced over a hundred texts that are still available. 9  In 1992, the Bibliothque nationale de France launched a vast digitization program. The president Franois Mitterrand had wanted since 1988 to create a new and innovative digital library, and it was published in 1997 under the name of Gallica . 10  In 2014, the digital library was offering 80 255 online books and over a million documents, including prints and manuscripts. 11  In 2003, Wikisource was launched, and the project aspired to constitute a digital and multilingual library that would be a complement to the Wikipedia project. It was originally named Project Sourceberg, as a word play to remind the Project Gutenberg. 12  Supported by the Wikimedia Foundation , Wikisource proposes digitized texts that have been verified by volunteers. 13  In December 2004, Google created Google Books , a project to digitize all the books available in the word over 130 million books to make them accessible online. 14  10 years later, 25 000 000 books, from a hundred countries and in 400 languages, are on the platform. This was possible because by that time, robotic scanners could digitize around 6 000 books per hour. 15  In 2008, the prototype of Europeana was launched and by 2010, the project had been giving access to over 10 million digital objects. The Europeana library is a European catalog that offers index cards on millions of digital objects and links to their digital libraries. 16  In the same year, HathiTrust was created to put together the contents of many university e-libraries from USA and Europe, as well as Google Books and Internet Archive . In 2016, over six millions of users had been using HathiTrust. 17  Electronic publishing  edit  The first digitization projects were transferring physical content into digital content. Electronic publishing is aiming to integrate the whole process of editing and publishing production, layout, publication in the digital world. Alain Mille, in the book Pratiques de ldition numrique edited by Michael E. Sinatra and Marcello Vitali-Rosati, 18  says that the beginnings of Internet and the Web are the very core of electronic publishing, since they pretty much determined the biggest changes in the production and diffusion patterns. Internet has a direct effect on the publishing questions, letting creators and users go further in the traditional process  writer - editor - publishing house . 19  The traditional publishing, and especially the creation part, were first revolutionized by new desktop publishing softwares appearing in the 1980s, and by the text databases created for the encyclopedias and directories . At the same time the multimedia was developing quickly, combining book, audiovisual and computer science characteristics. CDs and DVDs appear, permitting the visualization of these dictionaries and encyclopedias on computers. 20  The arrival and democratization of Internet is slowly giving small publishing houses the opportunity to publish their books directly online. Some websites, like Amazon , let their users buy eBooks Internet users can also find many educative platforms free or not, encyclopedic websites like Wikipedia, and even digital magazines platforms. The eBook then becomes more and more accessible through many different supports, like the e-reader and even smartphones. The digital book had, and still has, an important impact on publishing houses and th eir economical models it is still a moving domain, and they yet have to master the new ways of publishing in a digital era. 21  Online edition  edit  Based on new communications practices of the web 2.0 and the new architecture of participation, online edition opens the door to a collaboration of a community to elaborate and improve contents on Internet, while also enriching reading through collective reading practices. The web 2.0 not only links documents together, as did the web 1.0, it also links people together through social media  thats why its called the Participative or participatory Web . 22  Many tools were put in place to foster sharing and creative collective contents. One of the many is the Wikipedia encyclopedia, since it is edited, corrected and enhanced by millions of contributors. Open Street Map is also based on the same principle. Blogs and comment systems are also now renown as online edition and publishing, since it is possible through new interactions between the author and its readers, and can be an important method for inspiration but also for visibility. 23  Process  edit  The electronic publishing process follows some aspects of the traditional paper-based publishing process 24  but differs from traditional publishing in two ways 1 it does not include using an offset printing press to print the final product and 2 it avoids the distribution of a physical product e.g., paper books, paper magazines, or paper newspapers. Because the content is electronic, it may be distributed over the Internet and through electronic bookstores, and users can read the material on a range of electronic and digital devices, including desktop computers , laptops , tablet computers , smartphones or e-reader tablets. The consumer may read the published content online a website, in an application on a tablet device, or in a PDF document on a computer. In some cases, the reader may print the content onto paper using a consumer-grade ink-jet or laser printer or via a print on demand system. Some users download digital content to their devices, enabling them to read the content even when their device is not connected to the Internet e.g., on an airplane flight. Distributing content electronically as software applications apps has become popular in the 2010s, due to the rapid consumer adoption of smartphones and tablets. At first, native apps for each mobile platform were required to reach all audiences, but in an effort toward universal device compatibility, attention has turned to using HTML5 to create web apps that can run on any browser and function on many devices. The benefit of electronic publishing comes from using three attributes of digital technology XML tags to define content, 25  style sheets to define the look of content, and metadata  data about data to describe the content for search engines , thus helping users to find and locate the content a common example of metadata is the information about a songs songwriter , composer , genre that is electronically encoded along with most CDs and digital audio files  this metadata makes it easier for music lovers to find the songs they are looking for. With the use of tags, style sheets, and metadata, this enables reflowable content that adapts to various reading devices tablet, smartphone, e-reader, etc. or electronic delivery methods. Because electronic publishing often requires text mark-up e.g., Hyper Text Markup Language or some other markup language to develop online delivery methods, the traditional roles of typesetters and book designers, who created the printing set-ups for paper books, have changed. Designers of digitally published content must have a strong knowledge of mark-up languages, the variety of reading devices and computers available, and the ways in which consumers read, view or access the content. However, in the 2010s, new user friendly design software is becoming available for designers to publish content in this standard without needing to know detailed programming techniques, such as Adobe Systems  Digital Publishing Suite and Apples iBooks Author . The most common file format is .epub , used in many e-book formats . .epub is a free and open standard available in many publishing programs. Another common format is .folio, which is used by the Adobe Digital Publishing Suite to create content for Apples iPad tablets and apps. Academic publishing  edit  Main article Academic publishing See also Eprint After an article is submitted to an academic journal for consideration, there can be a delay ranging from several months to more than two years 26  before it is published in a journal, rendering journals a less than ideal format for disseminating current research. In some fields such as astronomy and some areas of physics , the role of the journal in disseminating the latest research has largely been replaced by preprint repositories such as arXiv.org . However, scholarly journals still play an important role in quality control and establishing scientific credit. In many instances, the electronic materials uploaded to preprint repositories are still intended for eventual publication in a peer-reviewed journal. There is statistical evidence that electronic publishing provides wider dissemination, 27  because when a journal is available online, a larger number of researchers can access the journal. Even if a professor is working in a university that does not have a certain journal in its library, she may still be able to access the journal online. A number of journals have, while retaining their longstanding peer review process to ensure that the research is done properly, established electronic versions or even moved entirely to electronic publication. Copyright  edit  In the early 2000s, many of the existing copyright laws were designed around printed books, magazines and newspapers. For example, copyright laws often set limits on how much of a book can be mechanically reproduced or copied. Electronic publishing raises new questions in relation to copyright, because if an e-book or e-journal is available online, millions of Internet users m ay be able to view a single electronic copy of the document, without any copies being made. Emerging evidence suggests that e-publishing may be more collaborative than traditional paper-based publishing e-publishing often involves more than one author, and the resulting works are more accessible, since they are published online. At the same time, the availability of published material online opens more doors for plagiarism , unauthorized use, or re-use of the material. 28  Some publishers are trying to address these concerns. For example, in 2011, HarperCollins limited the number of times that one of its e-books could be lent in a public library . 29  Other publishers, such as Penguin, are attempting to incorporate e-book elements into their regular paper publications. Examples  edit  Electronic versions of traditional media  edit  CD-ROM E-book Electronic journal Online magazine Online newspaper PDF New media  edit  Blog Collaborative software Digital publication app Enhanced publication File sharing Mobile apps Podcast Business models  edit  Digital distribution Online advertising Open access publishing Pay-per-view Print on demand Self-publishing Subscriptions Non-subsidy publishing 30  See also  edit  Desktop publishing Electronic typesetting Mobile publishing References  edit   E-publishing - MaRS . MaRS . Retrieved 2018-07-13 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Pepitone, Julianne April 19, 2011. Tablet sales may hit 75 billion by 2015 . CNN Money . CNN .  Rebecca McPheters, Magazines and Newspapers Need to Build Better Apps , Advertising Age , January 13, 2012.  Dale Maunu and Norbert Hildebrand, The e-Book Reader and Tablet Market Report , Insight Media , October, 2010. As reported by Richard Hart, E-books look to be hit over holiday season , ABC 7 News , November 21, 2010.  Yinka Adegoke, Apple jumps into digital textbooks fray , Yahoo News , January 19, 2012.  Marie Lebert, Les mutations du livre  lheure de linternet , Net des tudes franaises, Montral, 2007  Dacos, Marin Mounier, Pierre 2010. III. Ldition au dfi du numrique in French. La Dcouverte. ISBN   9782707157294 .  Frantext . www.frantext.fr . Retrieved 2018-07-12 .  Lebert, Marie 2008. Les mutations du livre in French. Project Gutenberg.  A propos  Gallica . gallica.bnf.fr in French . Retrieved 2018-07-12 .  Tasrot-Gillery, Sylviane February 2015. La BNF et le numrique patrimonial et culturel PDF . La Lettre du Coepia in French.  WikisourceWhat is Wikisource - Wikisource . wikisource.org . Retrieved 2018-07-13 .  Wikisource International Full-Texts  Binghamton University Libraries News and Events . libnews.binghamton.edu . Retrieved 2018-07-12 .  Somers, James. Torching the Modern-Day Library of Alexandria . The Atlantic . Retrieved 2018-07-13 .  Google Books A Complex and Controversial Experiment . Retrieved 2018-07-12 .  Collections Europeana . Collections Europeana in French . Retrieved 2018-07-12 .  14 Million Books  6 Million Visitors HathiTrust Growth and Usage in 2016 pdf  Vitali-Rosati, Marcello E. Sinatra, Michael 2014. Pratiques de ldition numrique in French. Sens Public. ISBN   978-2-7606-3592-0 .  Vitalli-Rosati, Marcello E. Sinatra, Michael 2014. Histoire des humanits numriques . parcoursnumeriques-pum.ca . Pratiques de ldition numrique in French. Montral. Presses de lUniversit de Montral. pp.  4960. ISBN   978-2-7606-3202-8 . Retrieved 10 April 2017 .  5. Ldition numrique et le livre numrique . mediadix.u-paris10.fr in French . Retrieved 2018-07-12 .  E-Books Evolving markets and new challenges - Think Tank . www.europarl.europa.eu . Retrieved 2018-07-13 .  Editors, Applied Clinical Trials. Web 2.0 Revolution Power to the People . www.appliedclinicaltrialsonline.com . Retrieved 2018-07-13 .  5. Ldition numrique et le livre numrique . mediadix.parisnanterre.fr in French . Retrieved 2018-07-13 .  Chicago Manual of Style , Chapter 1  Chicago Manual of Style , Chapter 9  G. Ellison 2002.  The Slowdown of the Economics Publishing Process . Journal of Political Economy 110 5 947-993  Online Or Invisible by Steve Lawrence of the NEC Research Institute  Chennupati K. Ramaiah, Schubert Foo and Heng Poh Choo, eLearning and Digital Publishing .  where   Randall Stross, Publishers vs. Libraries An E-Book Tug of War .  The term non-subsidy publisher is used to distinguish an electronic publisher that uses the traditional method of accepting submissions from authors without payment by the author. It is, therefore, to be distinguished from any form of self-publishing. It is traditional publishing, probably using a non-traditional medium, like electronic, or POD . See also Subsidy Publishing vs. Self-Publishing Whats the Difference Archived 2010-01-02 at the Wayback Machine External links  edit  Library resources about Electronic publishing Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Wikiversity has learning resources about Collaborative play writing Electronic publishing at Curlie W3C Digital Publishing Activity v t e E-books Formats ePub FictionBook CBRCBZ Kindle File Format Mobipocket PDF Plain text IBA Reading Devices Amazon Kindle Barnes  Noble Nook Bookeen Elonex ebook enTourage eDGe Hanlin eReader iPad iriver Story Kobo eReader Onyx Boox Plastic Logic Reader PocketBook eReader Rocket eBook SoftBook Smartphones Tablets Tolino Software Adobe Acrobat Adobe Digital Editions Aldiko Apple Books  iBooks  Aquafadas Blio Bluefire Reader Calibre FBReader Google Play Books Kindle app Kitabu Kobo Lektz Lucifox Okular OverDrive Media Console Snapplify STDU Viewer Sumatra PDF Editing ABBYY FineReader AbiWord Adobe InDesign Adobe RoboHelp Aquafadas Atlantis Word Processor Booktype Calibre Calligra Author eXeLearning Help  Manual HelpNDoc iBooks Author iStudio Publisher LaTeX LibreOffice MadCap Flare Oxygen XML Editor PagePlus Pages QuarkXPress Scrivener Sigil Writer2epub Vendors Commercial Amazon Kindle Store Baen Free Library Barnes  Noble Booktrack Feedbooks Google Play iBooks Store Jarir.com Kobo Bookstore Sony Reader Store Smashwords Noncommercial Faded Page HathiTrust Internet Archive Project Gutenberg Australia Canada Wikisource Related topics Academic journal publishing reform Braille e-book Comparison of e-book readers Comparison of iOS e-book reader software Comparison of Android e-book reader software E-book lending Electronic publishing iBooks Author Conference International Digital Publishing Forum Kindle single OPDS Reflowable document Semantic publishing Authority control NDL  00575535 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleElectronic_publishing oldid909484855  Categories  Electronic publishing Publishing Hidden categories CS1 French-language sources fr Vague or ambiguous geographic scope from October 2013 Webarchive template wayback links Articles with Curlie links Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers