Document management system From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Digital archiving redirects here. For the long-term archiving of digital media, see digital preservation . EDMS redirects here. For an airport with ICAO acronym EDMS, see Straubing Wallmhle Airport . A document management system  DMS  is a system based on computer programs in the case of the management of digital documents  used to track, manage and store documents and reduce paper. Most are capable of keeping a record of the various versions created and modified by different users history tracking. The term has some overlap with the concepts of content management systems . It is often viewed as a component of enterprise content management ECM systems and related to digital asset management , document imaging , workflow systems and records management systems. Contents 1 History 2 Components 3 Standardization 4 Document control 5 Integrated DM 6 Document management software 7 See also 8 References 9 External links History  edit  Beginning in the 1980s, a number of vendors began to develop software systems to manage paper-based documents. These systems dealt with paper documents , which included not only printed and published documents, but also photographs , prints, etc... Later developers began to write a second type of system which could manage electronic documents , i.e., all those documents, or files, created on computers, and often stored on users local file-systems . The earliest electronic document management EDM systems managed either proprietary file types, or a limited number of file formats . Many of these systems later  when  became known as document imaging systems, because they focused on the capture, storage, indexing and retrieval of image file formats . EDM systems evolved to a point where systems could manage any type of file format that could be stored on the network. The applications grew to encompass electronic documents, collaboration tools , security, workflow, and auditing capabilities. These systems enabled an organization to capture faxes and forms, to save copies of the documents as images, and to store the image files in the repository for security and quick retrieval retrieval made possible because the system handled the extraction of the text from the document in the process of capture, and the text-indexer function provided text-retrieval capabilities. While many EDM systems store documents in their native file format Microsoft Word or Excel, PDF, some web-based document management systems are beginning to store content in the form of html . These policy management systems 1  require content to be imported into the system. However, once content is imported, the software acts like a search engine so users can find what they are looking for faster. The html format allows for better application of search capabilities such as full-text searching and stemming. 2  Components  edit  Document management systems commonly provide storage, versioning, metadata, security, as well as indexing and retrieval capabilities. Here is a description of these components Topic Description Metadata Metadata is typically stored for each document. Metadata may, for example, include the date the document will be stored and the identity of the user storing it. The DMS may also extract metadata from the document automatically or prompt the user to add metadata. Some systems also use optical character recognition on scanned images, or perform text extraction on electronic documents. The resulting extracted text can be used to assist users in locating documents by identifying probable keywords or providing for full text search capability, or can be used on its own. Extracted text can also be stored as a component of metadata, stored with the document, or separately from the document as a source for searching document collections. 3  Integration Many document management systems attempt to provide document management functionality directly to other applications, so that users may retrieve existing documents directly from the document management system repository, make changes, and save the changed document back to the repository as a new version, all without leaving the application. Such integration is commonly availabl e for a variety of software tools such as workflow management and content management systems , typically through an application programming interface API using open standards such as ODMA , LDAP , WebDAV , and SOAP or RESTful web services. 4  5  Capture Capture primarily involves accepting and processing images of paper documents from scanners or multifunction printers . Optical character recognition OCR software is often used, whether integrated into the hardware or as stand-alone software, in order to convert digital images into machine readable text. Optical mark recognition OMR software is sometimes used to extract values of check-boxes or bubbles. Capture may also involve accepting electronic documents and other computer-based files. 6  Data validation Data validation rules can check for document failures, missing signatures, misspelled names, and other issues, recommending real-time correction options before importing data into the DMS. Additional processing in the form of harmonization and data format changes may also be applied as part of data validation. 7  8  Indexing Indexing tracks electronic documents. Indexing may be as simple as keeping track of unique document identifiers but often it takes a more complex form, providing classification through the documents metadata or even through word indexes extracted from the documents contents. Indexing exists mainly to support information query and retrieval. One area of critical importance fo r rapid retrieval is the creation of an index topology or scheme. 9  Storage Store electronic documents. Storage of the documents often includes management of those same documents where they are stored, for how long, migration of the documents from one storage media to another  hierarchical storage management  and eventual document destruction. Retrieval Retrieve the electronic documents from the storage. Although the notion of retrieving a particular document is simple, retrieval in the electronic context can be quite complex and powerful. Simple retrieval of individual documents can be supported by allowing the user to specify the unique document identifier, and having the system use the basic index or a non-indexed query on its data store to retrieve the document. 9  More flexible retrieval allows the user to specify partial search terms involving the document identifier andor parts of the expected metadata. This would typically return a list of documents which match the users search terms. Some systems provide the capability to specify a Boolean expression containing multiple keywords or example phrases expected to exist within the documents contents. The retrieval for this kind of query may be supported by previously built indexes 9  , or may perform more time-consuming searches through the documents contents to return a list of the potentially relevant documents. See also Document retrieval . Distribution A document ready for distribution has to be in a format that cannot be easily altered. An original master copy of the document is usually never used for distribution rather, an electronic link to the document itself is more common. If a document is to be distributed electronically in a regulatory environment, then additional criteria must be met, including assurances of tracea bility and versioning, even across other systems. 10  This approach applies to both of the systems by which the document is to be inter-exchanged, if the integrity of the document is imperative. Security Document security is vital in many document management applications. Compliance requirements for certain documents can be quite complex depending on the type of documents. For instance, in the United States , standards such as ISO 9001 and ISO 13485 , as well as U.S. Food and Drug Administration regulations, dictate how the document control process should be addressed. 11  Document management systems may have a rights management module that allows an administrator to give access to documents based on type to only certain people or groups of people. Document marking at the time of printing or PDF-creation is an essential element to preclude alteration or unintended use. Workflow Workflow is a complex process, and some document management systems have either a built-in workflow module 12  or can integrate with workflow management tools. 5  There are different types of workflow. Usage depends on the environment to which the electronic document management system EDMS is applied. Manual workflow requires a user to view the document and decide whom to send it to. Rules-based workflow allows an administrator to create a rule that dictates the flow of the document through an organization for instance, an invoice pa sses through an approval process and then is routed to the accounts-payable department. Dynamic rules allow for branches to be created in a workflow process. A simple example would be to enter an invoice amount and if the amount is lower than a certain set amount, it follows different routes through the organization. Advanced workflow mechanisms can manipulate content or signal external processes while these rules are in effect. Collaboration Collaboration should be inherent in an EDMS. In its basic form, collaborative EDMS should allow documents to be retrieved and worked on by an authorized user. Access should be blocked to other users while work is being performed on the document. Other advanced forms of collaboration act in real time, allowing multiple users to view and modify or markup documents at the same t ime. The resulting document is comprehensive, including all users additions. Collaboration within document management systems means that the various markups by each individual user during the collaboration session are recorded, allowing document history to be monitored. 13  Versioning Versioning is a process by which documents are checked in or out of the document management system, allowing users to retrieve previous versions and to continue work from a selected point. Versioning is useful for documents that change over time and require updating, but it may be necessary to go back to or reference a previous copy. 13  Searching Searching finds documents and folders using template attributes or full text search. Documents can be searched using various attributes and document content. Federated search This refers to the capability to extend search capabilities to draw results from multiple sources, or from multiple DMSes within an enterprise. 14  Publishing Publishing a document involves the procedures of proofreading , peer or public reviewing, authorizing, printing and approving etc. Those steps ensure prudence and logical thinking. Any careless handling may result in the inaccuracy of the document and therefore mislead or upset its users and readers. In law regulated industries, some of the procedures have to be completed as evidenced by their corresponding signatures and the dates on which the document was signed. Refer to the ISO divisions of ICS 01.140.40 and 35.240.30 for further information. 15  16  The published document should be in a format that is not easily altered without a specific knowledge or tools, and yet it is read-only or portable. 17  Hard copy reproduction Documentimage reproduction is often necessary within a document management system, and its supported output devices and reproduction capabilities should be considered. 18  Standardization  edit  Many industry associations publish their own lists of particular document control standards that are used in their particular field. Following is a list of some of the relevant ISO documents. Divisions ICS 01.140.10 and 01.140.20. 19  20  The ISO has also published a series of standards regarding the technical documentation , covered by the division of 01.110. 21  ISO 2709 Information and documentation  Format for information exchange ISO 15836 Information and documentation  The Dublin Core metadata element set ISO 15489 Information and documentation  Records management ISO 21127 Information and documentation  A reference ontology for the interchange of cultural heritage information ISO 23950 Information and documentation  Information retrieval Z39.50  Application service definition and protocol specification ISO 10244 Document management  Business process baselining and analysis ISO 32000 Document management  Portable document format ISO 27001 Specification for an information security management system Document control  edit  Government regulations require that companies working in certain industries control their documents. These industries include accounting for example 8th EU Directive , SarbanesOxley Act , food safety e.g., Food Safety Modernization Act , ISO mentioned above, medical-device manufacturing  FDA , manufacture of blood, human cells, and tissue products FDA, healthcare  JCAHO , and information technology  ITIL . 22  Some industries work under stricter document control requirements due to the type of information they retain for privacy, warranty, or other highly regulated purposes. Examples include Protected Health Information PHI as required by HIPAA or construction project documents required for warranty periods. An information systems strategy plan ISSP can shape organisational information systems over medium to long-term periods. 23  Documents stored in a document management systemsuch as procedures, work instructions, and policy statementsprovide evidence of documents under control. Failing to comply can cause fines, the loss of business, or damage to a businesss reputation. The following are important aspects of document control reviewing and approving documents prior to release reviews and approvals ensuring changes and revisions are clearly identified ensuring that relevant versions of applicable documents are available at their points of use ensuring that documents remain legible and identifiable ensuring that external documents such as customer-supplied documents or supplier manuals are identified and controlled preventing unintended use of obsolete documents Integrated DM  edit  Integrated document management comprises the technologies, tools, and methods used to capture, manage, store, preserve, deliver and dispose of documents across an enterprise. In this context documents are any of a myriad of information assets including images, office documents, graphics, and drawings as well as the new electronic objects such as Web pages, email, instant messages, and video. Document management software  edit  Paper documents have long been used in storing information . However, paper can be costly and, if used excessively, wasteful. Document management software is not simply a tool but it lets a user manage access, track and edit information stored. Document management software is an electronic cabinet that can be used to organize all paper and digital files. 24  The software helps the businesses to combine paper to digital files and store it into a single hub after it is scanned and digital formats gets imported. 25  Web based document management software are becoming the staple of the industry .  citation needed  See also  edit  Construction collaboration technology Customer communications management Data proliferation Document automation Documentation Enterprise content management Information repository Information science Intelligent document Knowledge base Knowledge management Library science Product data management Revision control Snippet management Taxonomy general Technical data management system Technical documentation References  edit   Policy Management System Archived 29 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine  Stemming Making searching easier Archived 11 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine  Parsons, M. 2004. Effective Knowledge Management for Law Firms . Oxford University Press. p.  234. ISBN   9780195169683 . Retrieved 19 May 2018 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Shivakumar, S.K. 2016. Enterprise Content and Search Management for Building Digital Platforms . John Wiley  Sons. p.  93. ISBN   9781119206828 . Retrieved 19 May 2018 .  a b Fletcher, A.N. Brahm, M. Pargmann, H. 2003. Workflow Management with SAP WebFlow A Practical Manual . Springer Science  Business Media. pp.  1516. ISBN   9783540404033 . Retrieved 19 May 2018 .  Webber, M. Webber, L. 2016. It Governance Policies and Procedures . Wolters Kluwer. p.  41-4. ISBN   9781454871323 . Retrieved 19 May 2018 .  Trinchieri, D. 2003. Evaluation of Integrated Document Management System IDMS Options for the Arizona Department of Transportation ADOT . Arizona Department of Transportation. p.  158. The data validation rules should be embedded in the form itself, rather than accomplished in a post-processing environment. This provides the use an interactive real-time experience. Often data validation requires a database look-up. The rules should allow this database query, providing the user real-time choices based on query results.  Morley, D. Parker, C.S. 2014. Understanding Computers Today and Tomorrow, Comprehensive . Cengage Learning. p.  558559. ISBN   9781285767277 . Retrieved 19 May 2018 .  a b c Meurant, G. 2012. Introduction to Electronic Document Management Systems . Academic Press. p.  120. ISBN   9780323140621 . Retrieved 19 May 2018 .  Sommerville, J. Craig, N. 2006. Implementing IT in Construction . Routledge. p.  130. ISBN   9781134198986 . Retrieved 19 May 2018 .  Skipper, S.L. 2015. How to Establish a Document Control System for Compliance with ISO 90012015, ISO 134852016, and FDA Requirements . ASQ Quality Press. p.  156. ISBN   9780873899178 . Retrieved 19 May 2018 .  Austerberry, D. 2012. Digital Asset Management . CRC Press. pp.  2728. ISBN   9781136033629 . Retrieved 19 May 2018 .  a b Austerberry, D. 2012. Digital Asset Management . CRC Press. p.  30. ISBN   9781136033629 . Retrieved 19 May 2018 .  White, M. 2012. Enterprise Search . OReilly Media, Inc. pp.  7374. ISBN   9781449330408 . Retrieved 19 May 2018 .  International Organization for Standardization. 01.140.40 Publishing . Archived from the original on 6 June 2011 . Retrieved 14 July 2008 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   International Organization for Standardization. 35.240.30 IT applications in information, documentation and publishing . Archived from the original on 6 June 2011 . Retrieved 14 July 2008 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   OnSphere Corporation. SOP Document Management in a Validated Environments PDF . Archived from the original PDF on 4 September 2011 . Retrieved 25 April 2011 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Meurant, G. 2012. Introduction to Electronic Document Management Systems . Academic Press. p.  16. ISBN   9780323140621 . Retrieved 19 May 2018 .  International Organization for Standardization. 01.140.10 Writing and transliteration . Archived from the original on 7 July 2009 . Retrieved 14 July 2008 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   International Organization for Standardization. 01.140.20 Information sciences . Archived from the original on 5 December 2008 . Retrieved 14 July 2008 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   International Organization for Standardization. 01.110 Technical product documentation . Archived from the original on 6 June 2011 . Retrieved 15 July 2008 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Code of Federal Regulations Title 21, Part 1271 . Food and Drug Administration. Archived from the original on 10 October 2011 . Retrieved 31 January 2012 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Wiggins, Bob 2000. Effective Document Management Unlocking Corporate Knowledge 2 ed.. Gower. p.  25. ISBN   9780566081484 . Archived from the original on 13 January 2018 . Retrieved 9 April 2016 . At the organisational level an information systems strategy plan ISSP is a way to determine in general terms what information systems an organisation should have in place over the medium to long term typically around three to five years .... Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Document Management Systems - A Buyers Guide . Archived from the original on 10 January 2017 . Retrieved 10 January 2017 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Chaouni, Mamoun 5 February 2015. 7 Powerful Advantages of Using a Document Management System Archived 10 January 2017 at the Wayback Machine External links  edit  Wikimedia Commons has media related to Document management systems . SoftwareDocument Management at Curlie Authority control GND  4303691-0 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleDocument_management_system oldid913484747  Categories  Information technology management Document management systems Records management technology Hidden categories Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors deprecated parameters All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from February 2011 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2019 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Curlie links Use dmy dates from February 2011 Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers