Founders at Work From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Founders at Work Author Jessica Livingston Country United States Language English Publisher Apress Publication date 2007 Media  type Hardcover ISBN .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em 1-59059-714-1 Founders at Work Stories of Startups Early Days 2007 is a book written by Jessica Livingston composed of interviews she did with the founders of famous technology companies concerning what happened in their early years. 1  Contents 1 Interviews 2 Reception 3 References 4 External links Interviews  edit  Max Levchin - PayPal Sabeer Bhatia - Hotmail Steve Wozniak - Apple Computer Joe Kraus - Excite Dan Bricklin - Software Arts Mitch Kapor - Lotus Ray Ozzie - Iris Associates, Groove Networks Evan Williams - Pyra Labs Blogger.com Tim Brady - Yahoo Mike Lazaridis - Research in Motion Arthur van Hoff - Marimba Paul Buchheit - Gmail Steve Perlman - WebTV Mike Ramsay - TiVo Paul Graham - Viaweb Joshua Schachter - del.icio.us Mark Fletcher - ONElist, Bloglines Craig Newmark - craigslist Caterina Fake - Flickr Brewster Kahle - WAIS, Internet Archive, Alexa Internet Charles Geschke - Adobe Ann Winblad - Open Systems, Hummer Winblad David Heinemeier Hansson - 37signals Philip Greenspun - ArsDigita Joel Spolsky - Fog Creek Software Steve Kaufer - TripAdvisor James Hong - HOT or NOT James Currier - Tickle Blake Ross - Creator of Firefox Mena Trott - Six Apart Bob Davis - Lycos Ron Gruner - Alliant Computer, Shareholder.com Reception  edit  Chris Anderson , editor-in-chief of Wired Magazine stated this book offers both wisdom and engaging insights straight from the source. The Motley Fool says The stories are fascinating, filled with many valuable lessons. 2  Silicon India list it at the top of its list Five Books that Every Entrepreneur Must Read 3  References  edit   Interviews . Founders at Work . Retrieved 2012-07-05 .  Taulli, Tom 2012-05-07. Foolish Book Review Founders at Work   . Fool.com . Retrieved 2012-07-05 .  Five Books that Every Entrepreneur Must Read . Siliconindia.com. 2011-08-29 . Retrieved 2012-07-05 . External links  edit  Official website This article about a book on business is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it . v t e Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleFounders_at_Work oldid884844323  Categories  2007 non-fiction books Business books Business book stubs Hidden categories All stub articles