Structural engineering From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search This article includes a list of references , but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations . Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.  February 2009   Learn how and when to remove this template message  The Eiffel Tower in Paris is a historical achievement of structural engineering. Structural engineering is a sub-discipline of civil engineering in which structural engineers are trained to design the bones and muscles that create the form and shape of man made structures. Structural engineers need to understand and calculate the stability, strength and rigidity of built structures for buildings 1  and nonbuilding structures . The structural designs are integrated with those of other designers such as architects and building services engineer and often supervise the construction of projects by contractors on site. 2  They can also be involved in the design of machinery, medical equipment, and vehicles where structural integrity affects functioning and safety. See glossary of structural engineering . Structural engineering theory is based upon applied physical laws and empirical knowledge of the structural performance of different materials and geometries. Structural engineering design uses a number of relatively simple structural elements to build complex structural systems . Structural engineers are responsible for making creative and efficient use of funds, structural elements and materials to achieve these goals. 2  .mw-parser-output .toclimit-2 .toclevel-1 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-3 .toclevel-2 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-4 .toclevel-3 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-5 .toclevel-4 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-6 .toclevel-5 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-7 .toclevel-6 uldisplaynone Contents 1 History 1.1 Timeline 1.2 Structural failure 2 Theory 3 Profession 4 Specializations 4.1 Building structures 4.2 Earthquake engineering structures 4.3 Civil engineering structures 4.4 Mechanical structures 4.5 Aerospace structures 4.6 Nanoscale structures 4.7 Structural engineering for medical science 5 Structural elements 5.1 Columns 5.2 Beams 5.3 Trusses 5.4 Plates 5.5 Shells 5.6 Arches 5.7 Catenaries 6 Materials 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links History  edit  Main article History of structural engineering Pont du Gard , France, a Roman era aqueduct circa 19 BC. Structural engineering dates back to 2700 B.C.E. when the step pyramid for Pharaoh Djoser was built by Imhotep , the first engineer in history known by name. Pyramids were the most common major structures built by ancient civilizations because the structural form of a pyramid is inherently stable and can be almost infinitely scaled as opposed to most other structural forms, which cannot be linearly increased in size in proportion to increased loads. 3  The structural stability of the pyramid, whilst primarily gained from its shape, relies also on the strength of the stone from which it is constructed, and its ability to support the weight of the stone above it. 4  The limestone blocks were often taken from a quarry near the build site and have a compressive strength from 30 to 250 MPa MPa  Pa  106. 5  Therefore, the structural strength of the pyramid stems from the material properties of the stones from which it was built rather than the pyramids geometry. Throughout ancient and medieval history most architectural design and construction was carried out by artisans, such as stonemasons and carpenters, rising to the role of master builder. No theory of structures existed, and understanding of how structures stood up was extremely limited, and based almost entirely on empirical evidence of what had worked before. Knowledge was re tained by guilds and seldom supplanted by advances. Structures were repetitive, and increases in scale were incremental. 3  No record exists of the first calculations of the strength of structural members or the behavior of structural material, but the profession of structural engineer only really took shape with the Industrial Revolution and the re-invention of concrete see History of Concrete . The physical sciences underlying structural engineering began to be understood in the Renaissance and have since developed into computer-based applications pioneered in the 1970s. 6  Timeline  edit  Galileo Galilei published the book Two New Sciences in which he examined the failure of simple structures Isaac Newton published Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica which contains the Newtons laws of motion Leonhard Euler developed the theory of buckling of columns 14521519 Leonardo da Vinci made many contributions 1638 Galileo Galilei published the book Two New Sciences in which he examined the failure of simple 1660 Hookes law by Robert Hooke 1687 Isaac Newton published Philosophi Naturalis Principia Mathematica which contains the Newtons laws of motion 1750 EulerBernoulli beam equation 17001782 Daniel Bernoulli introduced the principle of virtual work 17071783 Leonhard Euler developed the theory of buckling of columns 1826 Claude-Louis Navier published a treatise on the elastic behaviors of structures 1873 Carlo Alberto Castigliano presented his dissertation Intorno ai sistemi elastici, which contains his theorem for computing displacement as partial derivative of the strain energy. This theorem includes the method of least work as a special case 1874 Otto Mohr formalized the idea of a statically indeterminate structure. 1922 Timoshenko corrects the Euler-Bernoulli beam equation 1936 Hardy Cross  publication of the moment distribution method, an important innovation in the design of continuous frames. 1941 Alexander Hrennikoff solved the discretization of plane elasticity problems using a lattice framework 1942 R. Courant divided a domain into finite subregions 1956 J. Turner, R. W. Clough, H. C. Martin, and L. J. Topps paper on the Stiffness and Deflection of Complex Structures introduces the name finite-element method and is widely recognized as the first comprehensive treatment of the method as it is known today Structural failure  edit  Main articles Structural failure and List of structural failures and collapses The history of structural engineering contains many collapses and failures. Sometimes this is due to obvious negligence, as in the case of the Ption-Ville school collapse , in which Rev. Fortin Augustin constructed the building all by himself, saying he didnt need an engineer as he had good knowledge of construction following a partial collapse of the three-story schoolhouse that sent neighbors fleeing. The final collapse killed 94 people, mostly children. In other cases structural failures require careful study, and the results of these inquiries have resulted in improved practices and greater understanding of the science of structural engineering. Some such studies are the result of forensic engineering investigations where the original engineer seems to have done everything in accordance with the state of the profession and acceptable practice yet a failure still eventuated. A famous case of structural knowledge and practice being advanced in this manner can be found in a series of failures involving box girders which collapsed in Australia during the 1970s. Theory  edit  Main article Structural engineering theory Figure of a bolt in shear stress . Top figure illustrates single shear, bottom figure illustrates double shear. Structural engineering depends upon a detailed knowledge of applied mechanics , materials science and applied mathematics to understand and predict how structures support and resist self-weight and imposed loads. To apply the knowledge successfully a structural engineer generally requires detailed knowledge of relevant empirical and theoretical design codes , the techniques of structural analysis , as well as some knowledge of the corrosion resistance of the materials and structures, especially when those structures are exposed to the external environment. Since the 1990s, specialist software has become available to aid in the design of structures, with the functionality to assist in the drawing, analyzing and designing of structures with maximum precision examples include AutoCAD , StaadPro, ETABS , Prokon, Revit Structure, Inducta RCB, etc. Such software may also take into consideration environmental loads, such as from earthquakes and winds. Profession  edit  Main article Structural engineer Structural engineers are responsible for engineering design and structural analysis. Entry-level structural engineers may design the individual structural elements of a structure, such as the beams and columns of a building. More experienced engineers may be responsible for the structural design and integrity of an entire system, such as a building. Structural engineers often specialize in particular types of structures, such as buildings, bridges, pipelines, industrial, tunnels, vehicles, ships, aircraft and spacecraft. Structural engineers who specialize in buildings often specialize in particular construction materials such as concrete, steel, wood, masonry, alloys and composites, and may focus on particular types of b uildings such as offices, schools, hospitals, residential, and so forth. Structural engineering has existed since humans first started to construct their own structures. It became a more defined and formalized profession with the emergence of the architecture as distinct profession from the engineering during the industrial revolution in the late 19th century. Until then, the architect and the structural engineer were usually one and the same thing  the master builder. Only with the development of specialized knowledge of structural theories that emerged during the 19th and early 20th centuries, did the professional structural engineers come into existence. The role of a structural engineer today involves a significant understanding of both static and dynamic loading, and the structures that are available to resist them. The complexity of modern structures often requires a great deal of creativity from the engineer in order to ensure the structures support and resist the loads they are subjected to. A structural engineer will typi cally have a four or five year undergraduate degree, followed by a minimum of three years of professional practice before being considered fully qualified. Structural engineers are licensed or accredited by different learned societies and regulatory bodies around the world for example, the Institution of Structural Engineers in the UK. Depending on the degree course they have studied andor the jurisdiction they are seeking licensure in, they may be accredited or licensed as just structural engineers, or as civil engineers, or as both civil and structural engineers. Another international organisation is IABSEInternational Association for Bridge and Structural Engineering. 7  The aim of that association is to exchange knowledge and to advance the practice of structural engineering worldwide in the service of the profession and society. Specializations  edit  Building structures  edit  See also Building engineering Sydney Opera House , designed by Architect Jrn Utzon and structural design by Ove Arup  Partners Millennium Dome in London, UK, by Richard Rogers and Buro Happold Burj Khalifa , in Dubai , the worlds tallest building , shown under construction in 2007 since completed Structural building engineering includes all structural engineering related to the design of buildings. It is a branch of structural engineering closely affiliated with architecture . Structural building engineering is primarily driven by the creative manipulation of materials and forms and the underlying mathematical and scientific ideas to achieve an end which fulfills its functional requirements and is structurally safe when subjected to all the loads it could reasonably be expected to experience. This is subtly different from architectural design, which is driven by the creative manipulation of materials and forms, mass, space, volume, texture and light to achieve an end which is aesthetic, functional and often artistic. The architect is usually the lead designer on buildings, with a structural engineer employed as a sub-consultant. The degree to which each discipline actually leads the design depends heavily on the type of structure. Many structures are structurally simple and led by architecture, such as multi-storey office buildings and housing, while other structures, such as tensile structures , shells and gridshells are heavily dependent on their form for their strength, and the engineer may have a more significant influence on the form, and hence much of the aesthetic, than the architect. The structural design for a building must ensure that the building is able to stand up safely, able to function without excessive deflections or movements which may cause fatigue of structural elements, cracking or failure of fixtures, fittings or partitions, or discomfort for occupants. It must account for movements and forces due to temperature, creep , cracking and imposed loads. It must also ensure that the design is practically buildable within acceptable manufacturing tolerances of the materials. It must allow the architecture to work, and the building services to fit within the building and function air conditioning, ventilation, smoke extract, electrics, lighting etc.. The structural design of a modern building can b e extremely complex, and often requires a large team to complete. Structural engineering specialties for buildings include Earthquake engineering Faade engineering Fire engineering Roof engineering Tower engineering Wind engineering Earthquake engineering structures  edit  Main article Earthquake engineering structures Earthquake engineering structures are those engineered to withstand earthquakes . Earthquake-proof pyramid El Castillo, Chichen Itza The main objectives of earthquake engineering are to understand the interaction of structures with the shaking ground, foresee the consequences of possible earthquakes, and design and construct the structures to perform during an earthquake. Earthquake-proof structures are not necessarily extremely strong like the El Castillo pyramid at Chichen Itza shown above. One important tool of earthquake engineering is base isolation , which allows the base of a structure to move freely with the ground. Civil engineering structures  edit  Civil structural engineering includes all structural engineering related to the built environment. It includes Bridges Dams Earthworks Foundations Offshore structures Pipelines Power stations Railways Retaining structures and walls Roads Tunnels Waterways Reservoirs Water and wastewater infrastructure The structural engineer is the lead designer on these structures, and often the sole designer. In the design of structures such as these, structural safety is of paramount importance in the UK, designs for dams, nuclear power stations and bridges must be signed off by a chartered engineer . Civil engineering structures are often subjected to very extreme forces, such as large variations in temperature, dynamic loads such as waves or traffic, or high pressures from water or compressed gases. They are also often constructed in corrosive environments, such as at sea, in industrial facilities or below ground. Mechanical structures  edit  The principles of structural engineering are applicable to variety of mechanical moveable structures. The design of static structures assumes they always have the same geometry in fact, so-called static structures can move significantly, and structural engineering design must take this into account where necessary, but the design of moveable or moving structures must accoun t for fatigue , variation in the method in which load is resisted and significant deflections of structures. The forces which parts of a machine are subjected to can vary significantly, and can do so at a great rate. The forces which a boat or aircraft are subjected to vary enormously and will do so thousands of times over the structures lifetime. The structural design must ensure that such structures are able to endure such loading for their entire design life without failing. These works can require mechanical structural engineering Boilers and pressure vessels Coachworks and carriages Cranes Elevators Escalators Marine vessels and hulls Aerospace structures  edit  An Airbus A380 , the worlds largest passenger airliner Design of missile needs in depth understanding of Structural Analysis Aerospace structure types include launch vehicles,  Atlas , Delta , Titan, missiles ALCM, Harpoon, Hypersonic vehicles Space Shuttle, military aircraft F-16, F-18 and commercial aircraft  Boeing 777, MD-11. Aerospace structures typically consist of thin plates with stiffeners for the external surfaces, bulkheads and frames to support the shape and fasteners such as welds, rivets, screws and bolts to hold the components together. Nanoscale structures  edit  A nanostructure is an object of intermediate size between molecular and microscopic micrometer-sized structures. In describing nanostructures it is necessary to differentiate between the number of dimensions on the nanoscale. Nanotextured surfaces have one dimension on the nanoscale, i.e., only the thickness of the surface of an object is between 0.1 and 100  nm. Nanotubes have two dimensions on the nanoscale, i.e., the diameter of the tube is between 0.1 and 100  nm its length could be much greater. Finally, spherical nanoparticles have three dimensions on the nanoscale, i.e., the particle is between 0.1 and 100  nm in each spatial dimension. The terms nanoparticles and ultrafine particles UFP often are used synonymously although UFP can reach into the micrometre range. The term nanostructure is often used when referring to magnetic technology. Structural engineering for medical science  edit  Designing medical equipment needs in-depth understanding of structural engineering Medical equipment also known as armamentarium is designed to aid in the diagnosis, monitoring or treatment of medical conditions. There are several basic types diagnostic equipment includes medical imaging machines, used to aid in diagnosis equipment includes infusion pumps, medical lasers and LASIK surgical machines  medical monitors allow medical staff to measure a patients medical state. Monitors may measure patient vital signs and other parameters including ECG , EEG , blood pressure, and dissolved gases in the blood diagnostic medical equipment may also be used in the home for certain purposes, e.g. for the control of diabetes mellitus. A biomedical equipment technician BMET is a vital component of the healthcare delivery system. Employed primarily by hospitals, BMETs are the people responsible for maintaining a facilitys medical equipment. Structural elements  edit  Main article Space frame A statically determinate simply supported beam, bending under an evenly distributed load. Any structure is essentially made up of only a small number of different types of elements Columns Beams Plates Arches Shells Catenaries Many of these elements can be classified according to form straight, plane  curve and dimensionality one-dimensional  two-dimensional One-dimensional Two-dimensional straight curve plane curve predominantly bending beam continuous arch plate , concrete slab lamina , dome predominant tensile stress rope, tie Catenary shell predominant compression pier , column Load-bearing wall Columns  edit  Main article Column Columns are elements that carry only axial force compression or both axial force and bending which is technically called a beam-column but practically, just a column. The design of a column must check the axial capacity of the element, and the buckling capacity. The buckling capacity is the capacity of the element to withstand the propensity to buckle. Its capacity depends upon its geometry, material, and the effective length of the column, which depends upon the restraint conditions at the top and bottom of the column. The effective length is K  l displaystyle Kl where l displaystyle l is the real length of the column and K is the factor dependent on the restraint conditions. The capacity of a column to carry axial load depends on the degree of bending it is subjected to, and vice versa. This is represented on an interaction chart and is a complex non-linear relationship. Beams  edit  Main article Beam Little Belt  a truss bridge in Denmark A beam may be defined as an element in which one dimension is much greater than the other two and the applied loads are usually normal to the main axis of the element. Beams and columns are called line elements and are often represented by simple lines in structural modeling. cantilevered supported at one end only with a fixed connection simply supported fixed against vertical translation at each end and horizontal translation at one end only, and able to rotate at the supports fixed supported in all directions for translation and rotation at each end continuous supported by three or more supports a combination of the above ex. supported at one end and in the middle Beams are elements which carry pure bending only. Bending causes one part of the section of a beam divided along its length to go into compression and the other part into tension. The compression part must be designed to resist buckling and crushing, while the tension part must be able to adequately resist the tension. Trusses  edit  Main article Truss The McDonnell Planetarium by Gyo Obata in St Louis, Missouri , USA, a concrete shell structure The 630 foot 192 m high, stainless-clad type 304 Gateway Arch in St. Louis, Missouri A truss is a structure comprising members and connection points or nodes. When members are connected at nodes and forces are applied at nodes members can act in tension or in compression. Members acting in compression are referred to as compression members or struts while members acting in tension are referred to as tension members or ties . Most trusses use gusset plates to connect intersecting elements. Gusset plates are relatively flexible and unable to transfer bending moments . The connection is usually arranged so that the lines of force in the members are coincident at the joint thus allowing the truss members to act in pure tension or compression. Trusses are usually used in large-span structures, where it would be uneconomical to use solid beams. Plates  edit  Main article Plate structure Plates carry bending in two directions. A concrete flat slab is an example of a plate. Plates are understood by using continuum mechanics , but due to the complexity involved they are most often designed using a codified empirical approach, or computer analysis. They can also be designed with yield line theory, where an assumed collapse mechanism is analysed to give an upper bound on the collapse load see Plasticity . This technique is used in practice 8  but because the method provides an upper-bound, i.e. an unsafe prediction of the collapse load, for poorly conceived collapse mechanisms great care is needed to ensure that the assumed collapse mechanism is realistic. 9  Shells  edit  Main article Thin-shell structure See also Gridshell Shells derive their strength from their form, and carry forces in compression in two directions. A dome is an example of a shell. They can be designed by making a hanging-chain model, which will act as a catenary in pure tension, and inverting the form to achieve pure compression. Arches  edit  Main article Arch Arches carry forces in compression in one direction only, which is why it is appropriate to build arches out of masonry. They are designed by ensuring that the line of thrust of the force remains within the depth of the arch. It is mainly used to increase the bountifulness of any structure. Catenaries  edit  Main article Tensile structure Catenaries derive their strength from their form, and carry transverse forces in pure tension by deflecting just as a tightrope will sag when someone walks on it. They are almost always cable or fabric structures. A fabric structure acts as a catenary in two directions. Materials  edit  Main article Structural material Structural engineering depends on the knowledge of materials and their properties, in order to understand how different materials support and resist loads. Common structural materials are Iron  wrought iron , cast iron Concrete  reinforced concrete , prestressed concrete Alloy  steel , stainless steel Masonry Timber  hardwood , softwood Aluminium Composite materials  plywood Other structural materials adobe , bamboo , carbon fibre , fiber reinforced plastic , mudbrick , roofing materials See also  edit  Glossary of structural engineering Aircraft structures Architects Architectural engineering Building officials Building services engineering Civil engineering Construction engineering Earthquake engineering Forensic engineering Index of structural engineering articles List of bridge disasters List of structural engineers Mechanical engineering Nanostructure Prestressed structure Structural engineer Structural engineering software Structural fracture mechanics Structural failure Structural robustness Structural steel Notes  edit   FAO online publication Archived 2016-11-19 at the Wayback Machine  a b What is a structural engineer . RMG Engineers . 2015-11-30. Archived from the original on 2015-12-08 . Retrieved 2015-11-30 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  a b Victor E. Saouma. Lecture notes in Structural Engineering PDF . University of Colorado. Archived PDF from the original on 2011-02-23 . Retrieved 2007-11-02 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Fonte, Gerard C. A. Building the Great Pyramid in a Year   An Engineers Report Report. Algora Publishing New York. p.  34. access-date requires url  help   Some Useful Numbers on the Engineering Properties of Materials Geologic and Otherwise PDF . Stanford University. Archived from the original PDF on 2012-06-16 . Retrieved 2013-12-05 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   ETABS receives Top Seismic Product of the 20th Century Award PDF . Press Release . Structure Magazine. 2006. Archived from the original PDF on November 27, 2012 . Retrieved April 20, 2012 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   IABSE Organisation, iabse website Archived 2004-08-06 at the Wayback Machine  httpwww.ramsay-maunder.co.ukdownloadsprecast_roof_slabs.pdf  Archived copy PDF . Archived PDF from the original on 2016-03-04 . Retrieved 2014-08-30 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  CS1 maint archived copy as title  link  References  edit  Hibbeler, R. C. 2010. Structural Analysis . Prentice-Hall. Blank, Alan McEvoy, Michael Plank, Roger 1993. Architecture and Construction in Steel . Taylor  Francis. ISBN   0-419-17660-8 . Hewson, Nigel R. 2003. Prestressed Concrete Bridges Design and Construction . Thomas Telford. ISBN   0-7277-2774-5 . Heyman, Jacques 1999. The Science of Structural Engineering . Imperial College Press. ISBN   1-86094-189-3 . Hosford, William F. 2005. Mechanical Behavior of Materials . Cambridge University Press. ISBN   0-521-84670-6 . Further reading  edit  Blockley, David 2014. A Very Short Introduction to Structural Engineering . Oxford University Press ISBN   978-0-19967193-9 . Bradley, Robert E. Sandifer, Charles Edward 2007. Leonhard Euler Life, Work and Legacy . Elsevier. ISBN   0-444-52728-1 . Chapman, Allan. 2005. Englands Leornardo Robert Hooke and the Seventeenth Centurys Scientific Revolution. CRC Press. ISBN   0-7503-0987-3 . Dugas, Ren 1988. A History of Mechanics . Courier Dover Publications. ISBN   0-486-65632-2 . Feld, Jacob Carper, Kenneth L. 1997. Construction Failure . John Wiley  Sons. ISBN   0-471-57477-5 . Galilei, Galileo. translators Crew, Henry de Salvio, Alfonso 1954. Dialogues Concerning Two New Sciences . Courier Dover Publications. ISBN   0-486-60099-8 Kirby, Richard Shelton 1990. Engineering in History . Courier Dover Publications. ISBN   0-486-26412-2 . Heyman, Jacques 1998. Structural Analysis A Historical Approach . Cambridge University Press. ISBN   0-521-62249-2 . Labrum, E.A. 1994. Civil Engineering Heritage . Thomas Telford. ISBN   0-7277-1970-X . Lewis, Peter R. 2004. Beautiful Bridge of the Silvery Tay . Tempus. Mir, Ali 2001. Art of the Skyscraper the Genius of Fazlur Khan . Rizzoli International Publications. ISBN   0-8478-2370-9 . Rozhanskaya, Mariam Levinova, I. S. 1996. Statics in Morelon, Rgis  Rashed, Roshdi 1996. Encyclopedia of the History of Arabic Science , vol. 23 , Routledge. ISBN   0-415-02063-8 Whitbeck, Caroline 1998. Ethics in Engineering Practice and Research . Cambridge University Press. ISBN   0-521-47944-4 . Hoogenboom P.C.J. 1998. Discrete Elements and Nonlinearity in Design of Structural Concrete Walls, Section 1.3 Historical Overview of Structural Concrete Modelling, ISBN   90-901184-3-8 . Nedwell, P.J. Swamy, R.N.ed 1994. FerrocementProceedings of the Fifth International Symposium . Taylor  Francis. ISBN   0-419-19700-1 . External links  edit  Engineering portal Structural Engineering Association  International National Council of Structural Engineers Associations Structural Engineering Institute , an institute of the American Society of Civil Engineers Structurae database of structures Structuremag The Definition of Structural Engineering The EN Eurocodes are a series of 10 European Standards, EN 1990  EN 1999, providing a common approach for the design of buildings and other civil engineering works and construction products v t e Engineering Civil Architectural Construction Environmental Earthquake Geotechnical Hydraulic Mining Structural Transportation Mechanical Acoustical Aerospace Automotive Marine Railway Thermal Electrical Computer Control Electromechanics Electronics Microwaves Power Radio Frequency Telecommunications Chemical Biochemical Biological Molecular Petroleum Process Reaction Interdisciplinary Audio Biomedical Engineering mathematics Engineering mechanics Engineering physics Engineering science Fire Industrial Information Materials science Ceramics Metallurgy Polymer Mechatronics Military Nanotechnology Nuclear Optical Photonics Privacy Robotics Sanitary Security Software Systems Glossaries Engineering Aerospace engineering Civil engineering Electrical and electronics engineering Mechanical engineering Structural engineering List of engineering branches CategoryEngineering Engineering portal Authority control BNE  XX527324 BNF  cb11936156t data LCCN  sh85129198 NARA  10675111 NDL  00566913 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleStructural_engineering oldid907550723  Categories  Structural engineering Civil engineering Engineering disciplines Hidden categories Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors deprecated parameters Pages using citations with accessdate and no URL CS1 maint archived copy as title Articles lacking in-text citations from February 2009 All articles lacking in-text citations Wikipedia articles with BNE identifiers Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers Wikipedia articles with NARA identifiers Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers