Professional certification computer technology From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .  Learn how and when to remove these template messages  This article needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources   Professional certification  computer technology     news    newspapers    books    scholar    JSTOR  June 2012   Learn how and when to remove this template message  This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedias quality standards . No cleanup reason has been specified. Please help improve this article if you can.  November 2009   Learn how and when to remove this template message   Learn how and when to remove this template message  Professional certifications in computer technology are non-degree awards made to those who have achieved qualifications specified by a certifying authority. Depending on the particular certification, qualifications may include completing a course of study, proof of professional accomplishments, achieving a specified grade on an examination. The intention is to establish that an individual holding a certification is technical ly qualified to hold certain types of position within the field. Certifications, generally, need to be renewed periodically, or may be valid for a specific period e.g. the lifetime of the product upon which the individual is certified. As a part of a complete renewal of an individuals certification, it is common for the individual to show evidence of continual learning  often termed continuing education  or earning continuing education units CEU. Certification is often used in the professions of information technology industry. Some certification programs are oriented toward specific technologies, and are managed by the vendors of these technologies. These certification programs are tailored to the institutions that would employ people who use these technologies. Contents 1 Vendor-specific certifications 2 Third-party and vendor-neutral certifications 3 General certification 3.1 Information systems security 3.2 Software testing 4 Criticisms 5 Education 6 DoD Directive 8570.1 and DoD Directive 8140 7 See also 8 References Vendor-specific certifications  edit  Alcatel-Lucent sponsors the Service Routing Certification program Apple Inc. sponsors the Apple certification program ARM Holdings sponsors the ARM Accredited Engineer program Avaya sponsors the Avaya Professional Credential Program Cisco Systems sponsors the Cisco Career Certifications program Brocade Communications Systems sponsors the Brocade Certification and Accreditation program Citrix Systems sponsors the Citrix Certified Administrator program Cyberoam sponsors the Cyberoam Security certifications program H3C sponsors the H3C Tecnnical certification program Hewlett-Packard sponsors the Certification and Learning certification program formerly HP ExpertONE 1  Dell sponsors the Dell Certified Systems Expert program with Associate and Master levels EMC sponsors the EMC Proven Professional certification program F5 sponsors the F5 Certification program Google sponsors the Google Apps Certification program IBM sponsors certifications 2  Juniper Networks sponsors the Juniper Networks Technical Certification Program LANDesk sponsors the Certified LANDesk Administrator and Certified LANDesk Engineer program Microsoft Corporation sponsors the Microsoft Certified Professional program MySQL as part of Oracle now sponsors a certification program 3  National Instruments offers certifications in LabVIEW , TestStand, and LabWindowsCVI software Nortel sponsors the Nortel Certifications program Novell sponsors a certification program Object Management Group sponsors the Certified Professional program for the Unified Modeling Language Oracle Corporation sponsors the Oracle Certification Program Pegasystems sponsors the Pegasystems Certification Program 4  Red Hat sponsors the Red Hat Certification Program SAP sponsors individual training and certifications 5  SAS sponsors a certification program SolarWinds sponsors the Solarwinds Certified Professional for network management 6  SpringSource sponsors the SpringSource Certified Professional program Sun Microsystems sponsors the Sun Certified Professional program now part of the Oracle Certification Program  Sybase sponsors the Certified Sybase Professional program VMware sponsors certification programs VCP, VCAP,  VCDX 7  Zend Technologies sponsors the Zend Certified Engineer  PHP  program Third-party and vendor-neutral certifications  edit  Third-party commercial organizations, trade associations , and vendor-neutral interest groups that sponsor certifications include Certiport sponsors the Microsoft Office Specialist and IC 3 certification Internet and Computing Core. CompTIA Computing Technology Industry Association CompTIA offers 12 professional IT Certifications, validating foundation-level IT knowledge and skills. The Document Foundation provides for LibreOffice developers and support providers. ECDL Foundation sponsors the European Computer Driving Licence also called International Computer Driving Licence  ICDL EITCI Institute operates the European Information Technologies Certification EITC and European Information Technologies Certification Academy EITCA programmes. 8  EMC Open type certifications in EMC Proven Professional certification program are vendor-neutral Electronics Technicians Association ETA International ETA offers 4 IT certifications Computer Service Technician CST Network Computer Technician NCT Network Systems Technician NST and Wireless Networking Technician WNT. International Information and Communication Technology Council Certification Program ISC sponsors the CISSP , SSCP and other security certifications Learning Tree International sponsors Learning Tree Professional Certification Linux Professional Institute sponsors LPIC with three levels plus an introductory Essentials certification. Majinate sponsored the now defunct Accredited Symbian Developer scheme for Symbian OS Metro Ethernet Forum operates the MEF Carrier Ethernet Certified ProfessionalMEF-CECP certification designed for telecommunication professionals seeking to validate their expertise, skills and knowledge of Carrier Ethernet technologies, standards, services and applications. Network Professional Association offers the Certified Network Professional program Planet3 Wireless sponsors the Certified Wireless Network Administrator CWNA certification RackSpace CloudU Certification by RackSpace 9  SAGE organization sponsors the cSAGE program SANS Institute operates the Global Information Assurance Certification programmer Airod The Open Group sponsors TOGAF certification and the IT Architect Certification ITAC and IT Specialist Certification ITSC skills and experience based IT certifications. General certification  edit  General certification of software practitioners has struggled. The ACM had a professional certification program in the early 1980s, which was discontinued due to lack of interest. Today, the IEEE is certifying software professionals, but only about 500 people have passed the exam by March 2005 update  . The IEEE Computer Society sponsors the Certified Software Development Professional as well as membership designations, Senior and Fellow which reflect experience and peer review qualification. The IET sponsors the Chartered Engineer and Incorporated Engineer , which can be ratified into the European Engineer 10  The BCS sponsors the Chartered IT Professional CITP programme. The Institute for Certification of Computing Professionals sponsors the Certified Computing Professional CCP and Associate Computing Professional ACP certifications The BDPA IT Institute sponsors the BDPA IT Associate BITA, the BDPA IT Professional BITP, and the BDPA IT Master BITM certifications The Canadian Information Processing Society sponsors the Information Systems Professional ISP and Information Technology Certified Professional ITCP in Canada. The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants sponsors the Certified Information Technology Professional program. APICS establishes operations management standards and sponsors certification for Logistics 11  The New Zealand Computer Society sponsors the Information Technology Certified Professional 12  programme The Australian Computer Society offers pathways to Certified Professional CP and Certified Technologist CT designation. 13  The Canadian Council of Technicians and Technologists sponsors the Certified Engineering Technologist or Professional Technologist Information Technology or Electronics Computer Technology profiles. Information systems security  edit  In an information systems environment that requires formal security accreditation, Certification refers to the comprehensive evaluation of the technical and non-technical security features of an information system 14  . Certification is formally defined by Krutz and Vines as  The comprehensive evaluation of the technical and non-technical security features of an information system and the other safeguards, which are created in support of the accreditation process to establish the extent to which a particular design and implementation meets the set of specified security requirements.  Software testing  edit  British Computer Society National Software Testing Laboratories American Society for QualityCertifications International Software Testing Qualifications Board ISTQB CSTE Criticisms  edit  See also Controversies over the term Engineer The current proliferation of IT certifications both offered and attained  citation needed  has led some technologists to question their value. Advanced training content that has been distributed on the Internet allows some to gain credentials without the implied depth or breadth of expertise beyond the certification material. Certifying agencies have responded in various ways some now incorporate hands-on elements, anti-cheating methodologies or have expanded thei r content. Others have expired and restructured their certificate programs, andor raised their fees to deter abuse. Education  edit  See also Student engagement Research on college students and high school students has been done to determine whether relevant Information Technology industry certification is an asset to the teaching profession as they appear to be in the business world. 15  16  The studies investigated CISIT student perceptions and outcomes of certified and non-certified instructors. As observed by Adelman, many post-secondary CISIT faculty were unconcerned about the emergence in the 1990s of a new, parallel universe of postsecondary credentials, Anderson and Reimers found that CISIT students were keenly aware if their instructors had them. For example, certain certifications DOD 8570.1M are the only commercial certifications that the Department of Defense will accept towards meeting their Information Assurance hiring requirements. The studies found a significant difference in learning outcomes between technology courses taught by certified and non-certified instructors students whose instructors held IT industry certifications had higher levels of achievement than their non-certified peers and that college undergraduate students showed a significantly greater perception of their instructors effectivene ss, teaching skills, professor technical expertise, and their own engagement in their classes with certified professors. Randall  Zirrkle 2005 noted a distinction between high school students and college students result benefit and the type of certification vendor neutral and vendor-specific. IT Certifications are considered as a standard of IT knowledge by most of the giant technology companies around the world. Best knowledge of up to date technologies is ensured by continuously updating the versions of certifications by the specific vendors. 17  DoD Directive 8570.1 and DoD Directive 8140  edit  The U.S. Department of Defense Directive 8570.1, signed in August 2004, requires every full- and part-time military service member, defense contractor, civilian and foreign employee with privileged access to a DoD system, regardless of job series or occupational specialty, to obtain a commercial certification credential that has been accredited by the American National Standard s Institute ANSI. 8570.1 established certification requirements in 3 levels Level I, II, and III was categorized into IAM - Information Assurance Management and IAT - Information Assurance Technician. Since its implementation the IT enterprise landscape has changed dramatically with the implementation of mobility, cloud computing, and cybersecurity areas of increased emphas is. As a result, the NICE - National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education was established to form the NICCS portal - National Initiative for Cybersecurity Careers and Studies. This initiative was a publicprivate collaboration and resulted in the publishing of The Framework 1.0. Since the initial framework has established it has been enhanced and published as The Framework 2.0 and has morphed into the DoD 8140 Directive which is anticipated to be in full implementation by December 2015. This framework breaks down into seven 7 categories and establishes 31 KSAs Key Specialty Areas, which fundamentally are silos within the IT landscape. See also  edit  Computer science portal Professional certification Certified Social Engineering Prevention Specialist Organizational Systems Security Analyst OSSA References  edit   Certification and Learning  IBM  MySQL  Pegasystems  SAP  By Shamus McGuillicuddy, SearchNetworking.com  SolarWinds offers network management training and certification . June 24, 2009. Retrieved August 20, 2009.  VMware  Certification programmes . European Information Technologies Certification Institute EITCI. .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  1  IET  APICS  ITCP  Australian Computer Society - Home . Acs.org.au. 2012-09-26 . Retrieved 2013-03-31 .  CompTIA Career Roadmap . CompTIA . Retrieved 20 Aug 2019 .  Andersson, D. 2009, Information Technology Industry Certifications Impact on Undergraduate Student Perception of Instructor Effectiveness. , UMI Dissertation Publishing Group, Volume 7005A. Publication No. 3358241  Reimers, K. 2009, Impact of Information Technology IT Industry Certification on the Achievement of High School Students Enrolled in Technology Courses  Hunsinger, S.  Smith, M.2008 Factors that Influence Information Systems. Journal of Information Technology Education Undergraduates to Pursue IT Certification Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleProfessional_certification_computer_technology oldid911751479  Categories  Professional titles and certifications Information technology qualifications Computer standards Hidden categories Articles needing additional references from June 2012 All articles needing additional references Articles needing cleanup from November 2009 All pages needing cleanup Cleanup tagged articles without a reason field from November 2009 Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from November 2009 Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2005 All articles containing potentially dated statements All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2007