Enterprise software From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Enterprise software , also known as enterprise application software  EAS , is computer software used to satisfy the needs of an organization rather than individual users. Such organizations include businesses, schools, interest-based user groups, clubs, charities, and governments. Enterprise software is an integral part of a computer-based information system  a collection of such software is called an Enterprise system . Services provided by enterprise software are typically business-oriented tools, such as online shopping, and online payment processing, interactive product catalogue, automated billing systems, security, Business Process Management , enterprise content management , IT Service Management , customer relationship management , enterprise resource planning , business intelligence , project management , collaboration , human resource management , manufacturing, occupational health and safety , enterprise application integration , and enterprise forms automation . As enterprises have similar departments and systems in common, enterprise software is often available as a suite of customizable programs. Generally, the complexity of these tools requires specialist capabilities and specific knowledge. Enterprise computing is the information technology IT tools that businesses use for efficient production operations and back office support.   These IT tools cover database management, customer relationship management, supply chain management,   business process management and so on. Contents 1 Definitions 2 Enterprise system 3 Types 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Definitions  edit  Enterprise Software is a collection of computer programs that have common business applications, tools for modelling how the entire organization works, and development tools for building applications unique to the organization. 1  The software is intended to solve an enterprise-wide problem, rather than a departmental problem. Enterprise level software aims to improve the enterprises productivity and efficiency by providing business logic support functionality. According to Martin Fowler , Enterprise applications are about the display, manipulation, and storage of large amounts of often complex data and the support or automation of business processes with that data. 2  Although there is no single, widely accepted list of enterprise software characteristics, 3  they generally include performance , scalability , and robustness . Furthermore, enterprise software typically has interfaces to other enterprise software for example LDAP to directory services  and is centrally managed a single admin page, for example. 4  Enterprise application software performs business functions such as order processing, procurement, production scheduling, customer information management, energy management, and accounting. It is typically hosted on servers and provides simultaneous services to a large number of users, typically over a computer network. This is in contrast to a single-user application that is executed on a users personal co mputer and serves only one user at a time. Enterprise system  edit  Enterprise system image describing what an enterprise system is Type software package Enterprise systems ES are large-scale enterprise software packages that support business processes, information flows, reporting, and data analytics in complex organizations. While ES are generally packaged enterprise application software PEAS systems they can also be bespoke, custom developed systems created to support a specific organizations needs. Types of enterprise systems include enterprise resources planning ERP systems , enterprise planning systems , and customer relationship management software. Although data warehousing or business intelligence systems are enterprise-wide packaged application software often sold by ES vendors, since they do not directly support execution of business processes, they are often excluded from the term. Enterprise systems are built on software platforms, such as SAPs NetWeaver and Oracles Fusion , and databases. From a hardware perspective, enterprise systems are the servers, storage and associated software that large businesses use as the foundation for their IT infrastructure . These systems are designed to manage large volumes of critical data. These systems are typically designed to provide high levels of transaction performance and data security. 5  Types  edit  Enterprise software can be categorized by business function. Each type of enterprise application can be considered a system due to the integration with a firms business processes. 6  Categories of enterprise software may overlap due to this systemic interpretation. For example, IBMs Business Intelligence platform Cognos, integrates with a predictive analytics platform SPSS and can obtain records from its database packages Infosphere, DB2. Blurred lines between package functions make delimitation difficult, and in many ways larger software companies define these somewhat arbitrary categories. 7  Nevertheless, certain industry standard product categories have emerged, and these are shown below   Business intelligence Business process management Knowledge Management KM Customer relationship management CRM - commonly used in smaller organisations too Database - such as Master data management MDM and Data Warehousing Enterprise resource planning ERP - which is a broad category covering Accounting, Human Resource, Corporate performance and governance, Customer Services, Sales, Procurement, Production, Distribution Enterprise asset management EAM Low-code development platforms LCDP Supply chain management SCM Product data management PDM Product lifecycle management PLM Networking and Information Security Software Defined Networking SDN - including SD-WAN Intrusion Detection and Prevention IDS Others that dont fit into well-known standard categories, or isnt limited to Enterprise use - Backup software , Billing Management, Accounting software , Content management system CMS See also  edit  Application Release Automation Software Application software Business informatics Business software Enterprise architecture Enterprise forms automation Enterprise planning system Global Information Network Architecture IBM Smarter Computing Identity management Identity management system Information technology management Integrated business planning Management information system Operational risk management Retail software Server computing Strategic information system References  edit   Management Information Systems Glossary of Terms  Martin Fowler , Patterns of Enterprise Application Architecture 2002. Addison Wesley.  What is Enterprise Software  Gartner Group IT Glossary - enterprise application software  MES Relationship with Other Enterprise Systems . statii . Retrieved 10 May 2016 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  What is enterprise application - A Word Definition From the Webopedia Computer Dictionary . Webopedia.com . Retrieved 2013-06-16 .  Integrate InfoSphere Warehouse data mining with IBM Cognos reporting, Part 1 Overview of InfoSphere Warehouse and Cognos integration architecture . Ibm.com. 2008-10-30 . Retrieved 2013-06-16 . External links  edit  Effects on the supply chain Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleEnterprise_software oldid912466601  Categories  Business software Enterprise architecture Hidden categories Pages using deprecated image syntax