Main Page From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Welcome to Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit . 5,925,674 articles in English Arts Biography Geography History Mathematics Science Society Technology All portals From todays featured article Wipeout 3 is a racing video game developed by Psygnosis and published by Sony Computer Entertainment for the PlayStation console, first released on 8 September 1999. In this third game in the Wipeout series, players control extremely fast anti-gravity ships in a futuristic setting and use weapons to force other contenders out of the race. Psygnosis hired the British design studio Designers Republic to develop the games look and feel, wanting a futuristic yet plausible setting. The games soundtrack was assembled from electronica artists including The Chemical Brothers and Orbital , as well as other performers. Critics praised Wipeout 3  s audiovisual presentation, with complaints leveled at the games unforgiving learning curve and controls. Despite overall positive reception, the game was a financial disappointment. Wipeout 3 Special Edition , featuring additional content, was released in 2000, and the next entry in the series, Wipeout Fusion , was released for the PlayStation 2 in 2002.  Full  article...  Recently featured George Hirst Effects of Hurricane Isabel in Delaware 1950 United States Senate election in California Archive By email More featured articles Did you know... Patricia Ortega ... that Venezuelan director Patricia Ortega pictured has drawn strength from her film Being Impossible during both personal and political upheavals ... that the prisoner of war massacre in Ciepielw is the most infamous instance of the war crimes of the Wehrmacht committed during the invasion of Poland  ... that Prince Tarabya Minye Kyawhtin ceded the throne of Ava to his cousin Prince Min Nyo after marrying his deceased brother s favorite queen, Shin Saw Pu , in return ... that the hard seeds of the Guinea plum are dispersed by elephants, and crushed and eaten by Sanje mangabeys  ... that Wang Guodong painted some of the worlds most recognizable portraits, which inspired Andy Warhol  ... that before opening West Point High School , the Tolleson Union High School District in Arizona was so overcrowded that it had to turn students away and use teachers lounges as classrooms ... that in June  2019, Northern Irish pilot Norman Surplus became the first person to circumnavigate the globe using an autogyro  ... that two Russian tortoises were aboard the first spacecraft to return safely from a trip around the Moon ... that Turkish womens footballer Asl Canan Sabrl was appointed technical director of her team while she was still a member of the squad ... that the Tarzan of Manisa planted thousands of trees on Mount Sipylus in Turkey  ... that The O.C. is the official, original, and only club that matters Archive Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Robert Mugabe The Indian Space Research Organisation loses contact with Chandrayaan-2 s Vikram lunar lander approximately 2.1 kilometres 1.3  mi above the Moons surface. Former Zimbabwean president Robert Mugabe pictured dies at the age of 95. A fire aboard a charter boat near Santa Cruz Island in California leaves at least thirty-three people dead and one other missing. Hurricane Dorian makes landfall in the Bahamas as a Category 5 hurricane, killing at least 30 people and leaving hundreds of others missing. Ongoing  Papua protests Brexit Hong Kong protests Recent deaths  Chris Duncan Abdul Qadir Kiran Nagarkar Peter Lindbergh Jos de Jess Pimiento Rodrguez Sergei Kirpichenko Nominate an article On this day September 8  Victory Day in Malta Severn Bridge 1755  French and Indian War  Despite being ambushed at the start of the Battle of Lake George , British colonial troops and their Mohawk allies were able to defeat French and Canadien troops and their Indian allies. 1831  William IV and Adelaide of Saxe-Meiningen were crowned king and queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland . 1900  The Great Galveston hurricane , the deadliest disaster in U.S. history , struck Galveston, Texas , with estimated winds of 135 miles per hour  215 kmh  at landfall, killing at least 6,000 people. 1966  Queen Elizabeth II opened the Severn Bridge pictured , suggesting that it marked the dawn of a new economic era for South Wales . 1994  USAir Flight 427 crashed on approach to Pittsburgh International Airport , resulting in 132 deaths and the longest accident investigation in the history of the National Transportation Safety Board . Sabrina Sidney d.  1843    Andrei Kirilenko b.  1906    Margaret Hodge b.  1944 More anniversaries September 7 September 8 September 9 Archive By email List of historical anniversaries Todays featured picture The 2017 Atlantic hurricane season was a hyperactive tropical cyclone season and the costliest on record, with a damage total of at least 282.02  billion 2017   USD . Featuring 17 named storms, 10 hurricanes and 6 major hurricanes, 2017 had the fifth-most named storms since reliable records began in 1851   tied with 1936   and the most major hurricanes since 2005 . Collectively, the tropical cyclones were responsible for at least 3,364 deaths   the most fatalities in a single season since 2005. Most of the seasons damage was due to hurricanes Harvey , Irma and Maria . Another notable hurricane, Nate , was the worst natural disaster in Costa Rican history. The names Harvey, Irma, Maria and Nate were retired following the season due to the number of deaths and amount of damage they caused. This season is also one of only six years on record to feature multiple Category  5 hurricanes and the only season other than 2007 with two hurricanes making landfall at that intensity. All ten of the seasons hurricanes occurred in a row   the greatest number of consecutive hurricanes in the satellite era, and tied for the highest number of consecutive hurricanes ever observed in the Atlantic basin. A hyperactive season, 2017 had the highest accumulated cyclone energy ACE since 2005, while a record three hurricanes each had an ACE of over 40 Irma, Jose and Maria. This picture, taken by the VIIRS instrument on the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration s Suomi NPP satellite on September  8, 2017, shows three hurricanes simultaneously active in the western Atlantic Katia left making landfall in the Mexican state of Veracruz , Irma center approaching Cuba, and Jose right northeast of the Leeward Islands at peak intensity. Photograph credit National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Recently featured Cuban peso Jane Addams Mammillaria spinosissima Archive More featured pictures Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal  Bulletin board, projects, resources and activities covering a wide range of Wikipedia areas. Help desk  Ask questions about using Wikipedia. Local embassy  For Wikipedia-related communication in languages other than English. Reference desk  Serving as virtual librarians, Wikipedia volunteers tackle your questions on a wide range of subjects. Site news  Announcements, updates, articles and press releases on Wikipedia and the Wikimedia Foundation. Village pump  For discussions about Wikipedia itself, including areas for technical issues and policies. Wikipedias sister projects .mw-parser-output sister-projects-listtext-alignleftbackgroundtransparentmargin1px.mw-parser-output sister-projects-listdivwidth32min-width20emwhite-spacenowrapmargin0 1pxdisplayinline-block.mw-parser-output sister-projects-listdivdivdisplayinline-blockvertical-alignmiddlemargin1px 0padding4px.mw-parser-output sister-projects-listdivdivfirs t-childmin-width50pxtext-aligncenter Wikipedia is hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation , a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other projects  Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Free-content news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning materials and activities Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English . Started in 2001   2001  , it currently contains 5,925,674 articles. Many other Wikipedias are available some of the largest are listed below. More than 1,000,000 articles Deutsch Espaol Franais Italiano Nederlands  Polski Portugus  Svenska Ting Vit  More than 250,000 articles  Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu  Catal etina Dansk Esperanto Euskara   Magyar Norsk Bokml Romn Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Trke  More than 50,000 articles Bosanski Eesti  English Simple English Galego  Hrvatski Latvieu Lietuvi  Norsk nynorsk Slovenina Slovenina  Complete list of Wikipedias Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleMain_Page oldid911547240 