Rosin From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search For other uses, see Rosin disambiguation . A cake of rosin, made for use by violinists, used here for soldering Rosin , also called colophony or Greek pitch  Latin  pix grca , is a solid form of resin obtained from pines and some other plants , mostly conifers , produced by heating fresh liquid resin to vaporize the volatile liquid terpene components. It is semi-transparent and varies in color from yellow to black. At room temperature rosin is brittle, but it melts at stove-top temperature. It chiefly consists of various resin acids , especially abietic acid . 1  The term colophony comes from colophonia resina , Latin for resin from Colophon , an ancient Ionic city. 2  Contents 1 Uses 1.1 Pharmaceutical 2 Production 3 Properties 4 Sources 5 See also 6 Sources 7 Notes 8 External links Uses  edit  Structure of abietic acid , a component of rosin Rosin is an ingredient in printing inks , photocopying and laser printing paper, varnishes , adhesives glues, soap , paper sizing , soda , soldering fluxes , and sealing wax . Rosin can be used as a glazing agent in medicines and chewing gum . It is denoted by E number E915. A related glycerol ester E445 can be used as an emulsifier in soft drinks . In pharmaceuticals , rosin forms an ingredient in several plasters and ointments. In industry, rosin is a flux used in soldering . The lead - tin solder commonly used in electronics has 1 to 2 rosin by weight as a flux core, helping the molten metal flow and making a better connection by reducing the refractory solid oxide layer formed at the surface back to metal. It is frequently seen as a burnt or clear residue around new soldering. A mixture of pitch and rosin is used to make a surface against which glass is polished when making optical components such as lenses . Rosin is added in small quantities to traditional linseed oil sand gap fillers mastic, used in building work. When mixed with waxes and oils, rosin is the main ingredient of mystic smoke , a gum which, when rubbed and suddenly stretched, appears to produce puffs of smoke from the fingertips. Rosin is extensively used for its friction -increasing capacity in several fields Players of bowed string instruments rub cakes or blocks of rosin on their bow hair so it can grip the strings and make them speak, or vibrate clearly. 3  Extra substances such as beeswax , gold , silver , tin , or meteoric iron 4  are sometimes added to the rosin to modify its stiction  friction properties and the tone it produces. 5  Powdered rosin can be applied to new hair, for example with a felt pad or cloth, to reduce the time taken in getting sufficient rosin onto the hair. Rosin is often reapplied immediately before playing the instrument. Lighter rosin is generally preferred for violins and violas, and in high-humidity climates, while darker rosins are preferred for cellos, and for players in cool, dry areas. 6  There are also specific, distinguishing types for bassesfor more see Bow music . Violin rosin can be applied to the bridges in other musical instruments, such as the banjo and banjolele , in order to prevent the bridge from moving during vigorous playing. Ballet , flamenco , and Irish dancers are known to rub the tips and heels of their shoes in powdered rosin to reduce slippage on clean wooden dance floors or competitionperformance stages. It was at one time used in the same way in fencing and is still used as such by boxers . Gymnasts and team handball players use it to improve grip. Rock climbers have used it in some locations, but it fouls the rock, so usage is now highly discouraged. Olympic weightlifters rub the soles of their weightlifting boots in rosin to improve traction on the platform. It is applied onto the starting line of drag racing courses used to improve traction . Bull riders rub rosin on their rope and glove for additional grip. Baseball pitchers and ten-pin bowlers may use a small cloth bag of powdered rosin for better ball control. Rosin can be applied to the hands in aerial acrobatics such as aerial silks and pole dancing to increase grip. An etching plate covered with powder resin Other uses are not based on friction Fine art uses rosin for tempera emulsions and as painting-medium component for oil paintings . It is soluble in oil of turpentine and turpentine substitute, and needs to be warmed. In a printmaking technique, aquatint rosin is used on the etching plate in order to create surfaces in gray tones. In archery , when a new bowstring is being made or waxed for maintenance purposes, rosin may be present in the wax mixture. This provides an amount of tackiness to the string to hold its constituent strands together and reduce wear and fraying.  citation needed  Dog groomers use powdered rosin to aid in removal of excess hair from deep in the ear canal. Some brands of fly paper use a solution of rosin and rubber as the adhesive. Rosin is sometimes used as an ingredient in dubbing wax used in fly tying . Rosin is used hot to de-encapsulate epoxy integrated circuits . 7  Rosin can be mixed with beeswax and a small amount of linseed oil to affix reeds to reed blocks in accordions. Rosin potatoes can be cooked by dropping potatoes into boiling rosin and cooking until they float to the surface. 8  Pharmaceutical  edit  Rosin and its derivatives also exhibit wide-ranging pharmaceutical applications. Rosin derivatives show excellent film forming and coating properties. 9  They are also used for tablet film and enteric coating purpose. Rosins have also been used to formulate microcapsules and nanoparticles. 10  11  Glycerol , sorbitol , and mannitol esters of rosin are used as chewing gum bases for medicinal applications. The degradation and biocompatibility of rosin and rosin-based biomaterials has been examined in vitro and ex vivo. Production  edit  Various types of rosin for violins, violas and cellos A piece of rosin for violins, violas and cellos Rosin is the resinous constituent of the oleo-resin exuded by various species of pine , known in commerce as crude turpentine . The separation of the oleo-resin into the essential oil spirit of turpentine and common rosin is accomplished by distillation in large copper stills . The essential oil is carried off at a temperature of between 100  C 212  F and 160  C 320  F, leaving fluid rosin, which is run off through a tap at the bottom of the still, and purified by passing through straining wadding. Rosin varies in color, according to the age of the tree from which the turpentine is drawn and the degree of heat applied in distillation, from an opaque , almost pitch-black substance through grades of brown and yellow to an almost perfectly transparent colorless glassy mass. The commercial grades are numerous, ranging by letters from A the darkest to N extra pale, superior to which are W window glass and WW water-white varieties, the latter having about three times the value of the common qualities. Tall oil rosin is produced during the distillation of crude tall oil , a by-product of the kraft paper making process. When pine trees are harvested the resinous portions of fallen or felled trees like longleaf and slash pines, when allowed to remain upon the ground, resist decay indefinitely. 12  This stump waste, through the use of destructive distillation or solvent processes, can be used to make products including rosin. This type of rosin is typically called wood rosin . Because the turpentine and pine oil from destructive distillation become somewhat contaminated with other distillation products, 12  solvent processes are commonly used. In this process, stumps and roots are chipped and soaked in the light end of the heavy naphtha fraction boiling between 90  C 194  F and 115  C 239  F from a crude oil refinery . Multi-stage counter-current extraction is commonly used so fresh naphtha first contacts wood leached in intermediate stages and naphtha laden with rosin from intermediate stages contacts unleached wood before vacuum distillation to recover naphtha from the rosin, fatty acids , turpentine, and other constituents later separated through steam distillation . Leached wood is steamed for additional naphtha recovery prior to burning for energy recovery. 13  After the solvent has been recovered, the terpene oils are separated by fractional distillation and recovered mainly as refined turpentine, dipentene, and pine oil. The nonvolatitle residue from the extract is wood rosin of rather dark color. Upgrading of the rosin is carried out by clarification methods that generally may include bed-filtering or furfural -treatment of rosin-solvent solution. 12  On a large scale, rosin is treated by destructive distillation for the production of rosin spirit, pinoline and rosin oil . The last enters into the composition of some of the solid lubricating greases , and is also used as an adulterant of other oils. Properties  edit  Pharmaceutical rosin Rosin is brittle and friable , with a faint piny odor. It is typically a glassy solid, though some rosins will form crystals , especially when brought into solution. 14  The practical melting point varies with different specimens, some being semi-fluid at the temperature of boiling water, others melting at 100  C to 120  C. It is very flammable, burning with a smoky flame, so care should be taken when melting it. It is soluble in alcohol , ether , benzene and chloroform . Rosin consists mainly of abietic acid , and combines with caustic alkalis to form salts  rosinates or pinates  that are known as rosin soaps . In addition to its extensive use in soap making , rosin is largely employed in making varnishes including fine violin varnishes, sealing wax and various adhesives . It is also used for preparing shoemakers wax , for pitching lager beer casks , and numerous other purposes such as providing backing surfaces to tin ware, copper ware, or even silver and gold vessels when embossing or engraving them its relatively low melting point, and firm solid form allows liquid rosin to be poured into the vessel, and when cooled allows embossing or engraving of the vessel without deforming the vessel - even if it has a skin which is quite thin. Afterwards, the object can be reheated in an oven, and the rosin poured out for reuse. Any remaining rosin film can easily be rinsed away with alcohol or other solvents. Rosin is also sometimes used as internal reinforcement for very thin skinned metal objects - things like silver, copper or tin plate candlesticks, or sculptures, where it is simply melted, poured into a hollow thin-skinned object, and left to harden. Prolonged exposure to rosin fumes released during soldering can cause occupational asthma formerly called colophony disease 15  in this context in sensitive individuals, although it is not known which component of the fumes causes the problem. 16  The type of rosin used with bowed string instruments is determined by the diameter of the strings. Generally this means that the larger the instrument is, the softer the rosin should be. For instance, double bass rosin is generally soft enough to be pliable with slow movements. A cake of bass rosin left in a single position for several months will show evidence of flow, especially in warmer weather. Prolonged exposure to rosin, by handling rosin-coated products, for example, laser printer or photocopying paper, can give rise to a form of industrial contact dermatitis . 17  Sources  edit  Colophony rosin from the maritime pine The chief region of rosin production is Indonesia , southern China such as Guangdong , Guangxi , Fujian , Yunnan and Jiangxi , and the northern part of Vietnam . Chinese rosin is obtained mainly from the turpentine of Massons pine Pinus massoniana and slash pine P. elliottii .  citation needed  The South Atlantic and eastern Gulf states of the United States is also a chief region of production. American rosin is obtained from the turpentine of longleaf pine Pinus palustris and loblolly pine P. taeda . In Mexico , most of the rosin is derived from live tapping of several species of pine trees, but mostly Pinus oocarpa , Pinus leiophylla , Pinus devoniana and Pinus montezumae . Most production is concentrated in the west-central state of Michoacn .  citation needed  The main source of supply in Europe is the French district of Landes in the departments of Gironde and Landes , where the maritime pine P. pinaster is extensively cultivated. In the north of Europe, rosin is obtained from the Scots pine P. sylvestris , and throughout European countries local supplies are obtained from other species of pine, with Aleppo pine P. halepensis being particularly important in the Mediterranean region.  citation needed  See also  edit  Resin Copal Amber Sources  edit  Kent, James A. Riegels Handbook of Industrial Chemistry Eighth Edition. Van Nostrand Reinhold Company 1983. .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em ISBN   0-442-20164-8 . Notes  edit   Fiebach, Klemens Grimm, Dieter 2000. Resins, Natural. Ullmanns Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry . doi  10.100214356007.a23_073 . ISBN   978-3-527-30673-2 .  colophony . Oxford English Dictionary 3rd ed.. Oxford University Press. September 2005.   Subscription or UK public library membership required.  ad. L. colophnia  Pliny  for Colophnia rsna resin of Colophon .  Mantel, Gerhard 1995. Problems of Sound Production How to Make a String Speak . Cello Technique Principles and Forms of Movement . pp.  13541. ISBN   978-0-253-21005-0 .  Larica metal rosin . 2009 . Retrieved Jun 15, 2014 .  All Things StringsRosin . archive.org . 1 May 2010. Archived from the original on 1 May 2010. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  CS1 maint BOT original-url status unknown  link   Heather K. Scott January 5, 2004. The Differences Between Dark and Amber Rosin . Retrieved Dec 27, 2016 .  Peter Laackmann, Marcus Janke Dec 28, 2014. Peter Laackmann, Marcus Janke Uncaging Microchips from 3018-3215 . Retrieved Feb 18, 2016 .  The Almost Lost Art of Rosin Potatoes .  Satturwar, Prashant M. Fulzele, Suniket V. Dorle, Avinash K. 2005. Evaluation of polymerized rosin for the formulation and development of transdermal drug delivery system A technical note . AAPS PharmSciTech . 6 4 E649E654. doi  10.1208pt060481 . PMC   2750614 . PMID   16408867 .  Lee, Chang-Moon Lim, Seung Kim, Gwang-Yun Kim, Dong-Woon Rhee, Joon Haeng Lee, Ki-Young 2005. Rosin Nanoparticles as a Drug Delivery Carrier for the Controlled Release of Hydrocortisone. Biotechnology Letters . 27 19 148790. doi  10.1007s10529-005-1316-x . PMID   16231221 .  Fulzele, S. V. Satturwar, P. M. Kasliwal, R. H. Dorle, A. K. 2004. Preparation and evaluation of microcapsules using polymerized rosin as a novel wall forming material. Journal of Microencapsulation . 21 1 8389. doi  10.108002652040410001653768 . PMID   14718188 .  a b c Beglinger, E. May 1958. Distillation of Resinous Wood, No. 496, Revised May 1958 PDF . United States Department of Agriculture Forest Service.  Kent pp.571 572  Palkin, S. Smith, W. C. 1938. A new non-crystallizing gum rosin. Oil  Soap . 15 5 120122. doi  10.1007BF02639482 .  colophony disease, Archaic Medical Terms List, Occupational , on Antiquus Morbus website  Controlling health risks from rosin colophony based solder fluxes , INDG249L, United Kingdom Health and Safety Executive, 1997 online PDF ISBN   0-7176-1383-6  Rosin allergy - DermNet New Zealand . www.dermnet.org.nz . External links  edit  Kotapish, Paul NovemberDecember 2001. Sticky Business How Rosin Is Made . Strings . v t e E numbers Colours E100199 Preservatives E200299 Antioxidants  Acidity regulators E300399 Thickeners , stabilisers  emulsifiers E400499 pH regulators  anticaking agents E500599 Flavour enhancers E600699 Miscellaneous E900999 Additional chemicals E11001599 Waxes E900909 Synthetic glazes E910919 Improving agents E920929 Packaging gases E930949 Sweeteners E950969 Foaming agents E990999 L-cysteine E910 Montan wax E912 Lanolin E913 Oxidised polyethylene wax E914 Esters of colophony E915 v t e Non-timber forest products Animal products Furs Honey Pine honey Wild game Berries Tree fruit Blackberry Blueberry Bilberry Binukaw Breadfruit Cocoa bean Coconut Durian Gambooge Huckleberry Jackfruit Juniper berry Lingonberry Raspberry Tamarind Woodland strawberry Edible plants   roots Betel Fiddlehead ferns Mahuwa flowers Sago palm queen Sassafras fil powder root beer Saw palmetto Wild ginseng Mushrooms Bare-toothed russula Bay bolete Birch bolete Cep Chanterelle Honey mushroom Lingzhi Matsutake Meadow mushroom Morel Oyster mushroom Parasol mushroom Red cap Saffron milk cap Slippery jack Truffle Yellow knight Nuts Spices Allspice Areca nut Bay leaf Black pepper Brazil nut Cinnamon Clove Hazelnut Malva nut Nutmeg Pine nut Vanilla Oil Waxes Carnauba Chaulmoogra  Hydnocarpus wightiana  Cocoa butter Eucalyptol Eucalyptus Japan wax Kokum Kusum Mahuwa Nagkesar Palm   kernel  Pongamia Phulwara Pilu Sal-seed  Shorea robusta  Sandalwood Shea butter Tea-seed Tea-tree Vateria indica Resins Benzoin Birch tar Camphor Creosote Frankincense Gamboge Kauri Lacquer Mastic Myrrh Pine tar Pitch Rosin Turpentine Varnish Sap   Gum   etc. Birch syrup Chicle chewing gum Coconut sugar Date sugar Fruit syrup Gum arabic Gutta-percha Kino Latex Maple sugar Maple syrup Palm sugar Palm wine akpeteshie ogogoro Rubber Spruce gum Other Amadou Bamboo edible musical instruments textiles Birch bark Birch beer Cork Ferns Forage Gambier Moss Natural dyes henna Peat Quinine Rattan Shellac Tanbark tannin Thatching Tendu leaves Vegetable ivory Willow bark Related Dehesa Iberian agroforestry Forest farming   gardening Honey hunting Indian forest produce Mushroom hunting Naval stores Permaforestry Resin extraction Rubber tapping Wildcrafting Category Commons Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleRosin oldid914445516  Categories  Resins Hidden categories Articles containing Latin-language text CS1 errors deprecated parameters CS1 maint BOT original-url status unknown All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2008