Library of Congress Control Number From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search For information on using this system on Wikipedia, see WikipediaAuthority control   LCCN . The Library of Congress Control Number  LCCN  is a serially -based system of numbering cataloging records in the Library of Congress in the United States. It has nothing to do with the contents of any book, and should not be confused with Library of Congress Classification . Contents 1 History 2 Format 3 See also 4 References 5 External links History  edit  The LCCN numbering system has been in use since 1898, at which time the acronym LCCN originally stood for Library of Congress Card Number. It has also been called the Library of Congress Catalog Card Number, among other names. The Library of Congress prepared cards of bibliographic information for their library catalog and would sell duplicate sets of the cards to other libraries for use in their catalogs. This is known as centralized cataloging. Each set of cards was given a serial number to help identify it. Although most of the bibliographic information is now electronically created, stored, and shared with other libraries, there is still a need to identify each unique record, and the LCCN continues to perform that function. Librarians all over the world use this unique identifier in the process of cataloging most books which have been published in the United States. It helps them reach the correct cataloging data known as a cataloging record, which the Library of Congress and third parties make available on the Web and through other media. In February 2008, the Library of Congress created the LCCN Permalink service, providing a stable URL for all Library of Congress Control Numbers. 1  Format  edit  In its most elementary form the number includes a year and a serial number. The year has two digits for 1898 to 2000, and four digits beginning in 2001. The three ambiguous years 1898, 1899, and 1900 are distinguished by the size of the serial number. There are also some peculiarities in numbers beginning with a 7 because of an experiment applied between 1969 and 1972 wh ich added a check digit . 2  Serial numbers are six digits long and should include leading zeros. The leading zeros padding the number are a more recent addition to the format, so many older works will show less full codes. The hyphen that is often seen separating the year and serial number is optional. More recently, the Library of Congress has instructed publishers not to include a hyphen. See also  edit  Library of Congress Subject Headings LCSH Authority control Virtual International Authority File VIAF CODEN Integrated Authority File GND Gemeinsame Normdatei  International Standard Book Number ISBN Books in the United States References  edit   Library of Congress Update for 2008 ALA Annual Conference January-May, 2008 . Archived from the original on 2017-08-28. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Structure of the LC Control Number . External links  edit  Wikidata has the properties Library of Congress Control Number LCCN bibliographic P1144 see uses  Library of Congress authority ID P244 see uses  Library of Congress Name Authority File NAF Traditional and normalized forms of the LCCN LCCN Permalink Frequently Asked Questions Bibliographic Processing Cataloging Rules Library of Congress Control Number LCCN at the Wayback Machine archived 2016-05-13 v t e Authority control files AAG  ACM DL  ADB  AGSA  autores.uy  AWR  BALaT  BIBSYS  Bildindex  BNC  BNE  BNF  Botanist  BPN  CiNii  DAAO  DBLP  DSI  GND  HDS  IAAF  ICIA  ISNI  Joconde  KulturNav  LCCN  LIR  LNB  Lonore  MusicBrainz  MGP  NARA  NCL  NDL  NGV  NKC  NLA  NLA-person  NLI  NLP  NLR  NSK  NTA  ORCID  PIC  ResearcherID  RERO  RKD  RKDimages ID  RSL  ICCU  SELIBR  SIKART  SNAC  SUDOC  S2AuthorId  TA98  TE  TePapa  TH  TLS  ULAN  US Congress  VIAF Authority control SNAC  w65g4sww Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleLibrary_of_Congress_Control_Number oldid913352251  Categories  Library cataloging and classification Library of Congress Identifiers Hidden categories CS1 errors deprecated parameters Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiers