Backdoor computing From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search This article has an unclear citation style . The references used may be made clearer with a different or consistent style of citation and footnoting .  June 2017   Learn how and when to remove this template message  This article is part of a series on Information security Related security categories Internet security Automotive security Cyberwarfare Computer security Mobile security Network security Threats Advanced Persistent Threat Computer crime Vulnerabilities Eavesdropping Malware Spyware Ransomware Trojans Viruses Worms Rootkits Bootkits Keyloggers Screen scrapers Exploits Backdoors Logic bombs Payloads Denial of service Web shells Phishing Defenses Computer access control Defence in Depth Application security Antivirus software Secure coding Secure by default Secure by design Secure operating systems Authentication Multi-factor authentication Authorization Data-centric security Encryption Firewall Intrusion detection system Mobile secure gateway Runtime application self-protection RASP v t e A backdoor is a method, often secret, of bypassing normal authentication or encryption in a computer system, a product, or an embedded device e.g. a home router , or its embodiment, e.g. as part of a cryptosystem , an algorithm , a chipset , or a homunculus computer a tiny computer-within-a-computer such as that found in Intels AMT technology . 1  2  Backdoors are often used for securing remote access to a computer, or obtaining access to plaintext in cryptographic systems . The backdoor may be used to gain access to passwords, delete data on hard drives, or transfer information within the cloud. A backdoor may take the form of a hidden part of a program, 3  a separate program e.g. Back Orifice may subvert the system through a rootkit , code in the firmware of the hardware , 4  or parts of an operating system such as Windows . 5  6  7  Trojan horses can be used to create vulnerabilities in a device. A Trojan horse may appear to be an entirely legitimate program, but when executed, it triggers an activity that may install a backdoor. 8  Although some are secretly installed, other backdoors are deliberate and widely known. These kinds of backdoors have legitimate uses such as providing the manufacturer with a way to restore user passwords. Many systems that store information within the cloud fail to create accurate security measures. If many systems are connected within the cloud, hackers can gain access to all other platforms through the most vulnerable system. 9  Default passwords or other default credentials can function as backdoors if they are not changed by the user. Some debugging features can also act as backdoors if they are not removed in the release version. 10  In 1993, the United States government attempted to deploy an encryption system, the Clipper chip , with an explicit backdoor for law enforcement and national security access. The chip was unsuccessful.  citation needed  Contents 1 Overview 2 Politics and attribution 3 Examples 3.1 Emilia Attack 3.2 Object code backdoors 3.3 Asymmetric backdoors 4 Compiler backdoors 4.1 Occurrences 4.2 Countermeasures 5 List of known backdoors 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Overview  edit  The threat of backdoors surfaced when multiuser and networked operating systems became widely adopted. Petersen and Turn discussed computer subversion in a paper published in the proceedings of the 1967 AFIPS Conference. 11  They noted a class of active infiltration attacks that use trapdoor entry points into the system to bypass security facilities and permit direct access to data. The use of the word trapdoor here clearly coincides with more recent definitions of a backdoor. However, since the advent of public key cryptography the term trapdoor has acquired a different meaning see trapdoor function , and thus the term backdoor is now preferred, only after the term trapdoor went out of use. More generally, such security breaches were discussed at length in a RAND Corporation task force report published under ARPA sponsorship by J.P. Anderson and D.J. Edwards in 1970. 12  A backdoor in a login system might take the form of a hard coded user and password combination which gives access to the system. An example of this sort of backdoor was used as a plot device in the 1983 film WarGames , in which the architect of the  WOPR  computer system had inserted a hardcoded password which gave the user access to the system, and to undocumented parts of the system in particular, a video game-like simulation mode and direct interaction with the artificial intelligence . Although the number of backdoors in systems using proprietary software software whose source code is not publicly available is not widely credited, they are nevertheless frequently exposed. Programmers have even succeeded in secretly installing large amounts of benign code as Easter eggs in programs, although such cases may involve official forbearance, if not actual permission. A countermeasure against backdoors is open-source software , where the source code can be examined for potential backdoors and it is as such usually harder to hide a backdoor in there. Combined with reproducible builds one can also be sure that a provided binary corresponds to the publicly available source code. Politics and attribution  edit  This section possibly contains original research . Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.  June 2019   Learn how and when to remove this template message  There are a number of cloak and dagger considerations that come into play when apportioning responsibility. Covert backdoors sometimes masquerade as inadvertent defects bugs for reasons of plausible deniability . In some cases, these might begin life as an actual bug inadvertent error, which, once discovered are then deliberately left unfixed and undisclosed, whether by a rogue employee for personal advantage, or with C-level executive awareness and oversight. It is also possible for an entirely above-board corporations technology base to be covertly and untraceably tainted by external agents hackers, though this level of sophistication is thought to exist mainly at the level of nation state actors. For example, if a photomask obtained from a photomask supplier differs in a few gates from its photomask specification, a chip manufacturer would be hard-pressed to detect this if otherwise functionally silent a covert rootkit running in the photomask etching equipment could enact this discrepancy unbeknown to the photomask manufacturer, either, and by such means, one backdoor potentially leads to anoth er. This hypothetical scenario is essentially a silicon version of the undetectable compiler backdoor, discussed below. In general terms, the long dependency-chains in the modern, highly specialized technological economy and innumerable human-elements process control-points make it difficult to conclusively pinpoint responsibility at such time as a covert backdoor becomes unveiled. Even direct admissions of responsibility must be scrutinized carefully if the confessing party is beholden to other powerful interests. Examples  edit  Emilia Attack  edit  Many computer worms , such as Sobig and Mydoom , install a backdoor on the affected computer generally a PC on broadband running Microsoft Windows and Microsoft Outlook . Such backdoors appear to be installed so that spammers can send junk e-mail from the infected machines. Others, such as the SonyBMG rootkit , placed secretly on millions of music CDs through late 2005, are intended as DRM measuresand, in that case, as data-gathering agents , since both surreptitious programs they installed routinely contacted central servers. A sophisticated attempt to plant a backdoor in the Linux kernel , exposed in November 2003, added a small and subtle code change by subverting the revision control system . 13  In this case, a two-line change appeared to check root access permissions of a caller to the sys_wait4 function, but because it used assignment  instead of equality checking  , it actually granted permissions to the system. This difference is easily overlooked, and could even be interpreted as an accidental typographical error, rather than an intentional attack. 14  Marked in yellow backdoor admin password hidden in the code In January 2014, a backdoor was discovered in certain Samsung Android products, like the Galaxy devices. The Samsung proprietary Android versions are fitted with a backdoor that provides remote access to the data stored on the device. In particular, the Samsung Android software that is in charge of handling the communications with the modem, using the Samsung IPC protocol, implements a class of requests known as remote file server RFS commands , that allows the backdoor operator to perform via modem remote IO operations on the device hard disk or other storage. As the modem is running Samsung proprietary Android software, it is likely that it offers over-the-air remote control that could then be used to issue the RFS commands and thus to access the file system on the device. 15  Object code backdoors  edit  Harder to detect backdoors involve modifying object code , rather than source code  object code is much harder to inspect, as it is designed to be machine-readable, not human-readable. These backdoors can be inserted either directly in the on-disk object code, or inserted at some point during compilation, assembly linking, or loading  in the latter case the backdoor never appears on disk, only in memory. Object code backdoors are d ifficult to detect by inspection of the object code, but are easily detected by simply checking for changes differences, notably in length or in checksum, and in some cases can be detected or analyzed by disassembling the object code. Further, object code backdoors can be removed assuming source code is available by simply recompiling from source. Thus for such backdoors to avoid detection, all extant copies of a binary must be subverted, and any validation checksums must also be compromised, and source must be unavailable, to prevent recompilation. Alternatively, these other tools length checks, diff, checksumming, disassemblers can themselves be compromised to conceal the backdoor, for example detecting that the subv erted binary is being checksummed and returning the expected value, not the actual value. To conceal these further subversions, the tools must also conceal the changes in themselves  for example, a subverted checksummer must also detect if it is checksumming itself or other subverted tools and return false values. This leads to extensive changes in the system and tools being needed to conceal a single change. Because object code can be regenerated by recompiling reassembling, relinking the original source code, making a persistent object code backdoor without modifying source code requires subverting the compiler itself  so that when it detects that it is compiling the program under attack it inserts the backdoor  or alternatively the assembler, linker, or loader. As this requires subverting the compiler, this in turn can be fixed by recompiling the compiler, removing the backdoor insertion code. This defense can in turn be subverted by putting a source meta-backdoor in the compiler, so that when it detects that it is compiling itself it then inserts this meta-backdoor generator, together with the original backdoor generator for the original program under attack. After this is done, the source meta-backdoor can be removed, and the compiler recompiled from original source with the compromised compiler executable the backdoor has been bootstrapped. This att ack dates to Karger  Schell 1974 , and was popularized in Thompsons 1984 article, entitled Reflections on Trusting Trust 16  it is hence colloquially known as the Trusting Trust attack. See compiler backdoors , below, for details. Analogous attacks can target lower levels of the system, such as the operating system, and can be inserted during the system booting process these are also mentioned in Karger  Schell 1974 , and now exist in the form of boot sector viruses . 17  Asymmetric backdoors  edit  A traditional backdoor is a symmetric backdoor anyone that finds the backdoor can in turn use it. The notion of an asymmetric backdoor was introduced by Adam Young and Moti Yung in the Proceedings of Advances in Cryptology Crypto 96 . An asymmetric backdoor can only be used by the attacker who plants it, even if the full implementation of the backdoor becomes public e.g., via publishing, being discovered and disclosed by reverse engineering , etc.. Also, it is computationally intractable to detect the presence of an asymmetric backdoor under black-box queries. This class of attacks have been termed kleptography  they can be carried out in software, hardware for example, smartcards , or a combination of the two. The theory of asymmetric backdoors is part of a larger field now called cryptovirology . Notably, NSA inserted a kleptographic backdoor into the Dual_EC_DRBG standard. 4  18  19  There exists an experimental asymmetric backdoor in RSA key generation. This OpenSSL RSA backdoor, designed by Young and Yung, utilizes a twisted pair of elliptic curves, and has been made available. 20  Compiler backdoors  edit  A sophisticated form of black box backdoor is a compiler backdoor , where not only is a compiler subverted to insert a backdoor in some other program, such as a login program, but it is further modified to detect when it is compiling itself and then inserts both the backdoor insertion code targeting the other program and the code-modifying self-compilation, like the mechanism through which retroviruses infect their host. This can be done by modifying the source code, and the resulting compromised compiler object code can compile the original unmodified source code and insert itself the exploit has been boot-strapped. This attack was originally presented in Karger  Schell 1974 , p.  52, section 3.4.5 Trap Door Insertion, which was a United States Air Force security analysis of Multics , where they described such an attack on a PLI compiler, and call it a compiler trap door they also mention a variant where the system initialization code is modified to insert a backdoor during booting , as this is complex and poorly understood, and call it an initialization trapdoor this is now known as a boot sector virus . 17  This attack was then actually implemented and popularized by Ken Thompson , in his Turing Award acceptance speech in 1983 published 1984, Reflections on Trusting Trust, 16  which points out that trust is relative, and the only software one can truly trust is code where every step of the bootstrapping has been inspected. This backdoor mechanism is based on the fact that people only review source human-written code, and not compiled machine code  object code . A program called a compiler is used to create the second from the first, and the compiler is usually trusted to do an honest job. Thompsons paper describes a modified version of the Unix C compiler that would Put an invisible backdoor in the Unix login command when it noticed that the login program was being compiled, and as a twist Also add this feature undetectably to future compiler versions upon their compilation as well. Because the compiler itself was a compiled program, users would be extremely unlikely to notice the machine code instructions that performed these tasks. Because of the second task, the compilers source code would appear clean. Whats worse, in Thompsons proof of concept implementation, the subverted compiler also subverted the analysis program the disassembler , so that anyone who examined the binaries in the usual way would not actually see the real code that was running, but something else instead. An updated analysis of the original exploit is given in Karger  Schell 2002 , Section 3.2.4 Compiler trap doors, and a historical overview and survey of the literature is given in Wheeler 2009 , Section 2 Background and related work . Occurrences  edit  Thompsons version was, officially, never released into the wild. It is believed, however, that a version was distributed to BBN and at least one use of the backdoor was recorded. 21  There are scattered anecdotal reports of such backdoors in subsequent years. This attack was recently August 2009 discovered by Sophos labs The W32Induc-A virus infected the program compiler for Delphi , a Windows programming language. The virus introduced its own code to the compilation of new Delphi programs, allowing it to infect and propagate to many systems, without the knowledge of the software programmer. An attack that propagates by building its own Trojan horse can be especially hard to discover. It is believed that the Induc-A virus had been propagating for at least a year before it was discovered. 22  Countermeasures  edit  Once a system has been compromised with a backdoor or Trojan horse, such as the Trusting Trust compiler, it is very hard for the rightful user to regain control of the system  typically one should rebuild a clean system and transfer data but not executables over. However, several practical weaknesses in the Trusting Trust scheme have been suggested. For example, a sufficiently motivated user could painstakingly review the machine code of the untrusted compiler before using it. As mentioned above, there are ways to hide the Trojan horse, such as subverting the disassembler but there are ways to counter that defense, too, such as writing your own disassembler from scratch. A generic method to counter trusting trust attacks is called Diverse Double-Compiling DDC. The method requires a different compiler and the source code of the compiler-under-test. That source, compiled with both compilers, results in two different stage-1 compilers, which however should have the same behavior. Thus the same source compiled with both stage-1 compilers must the n result in two identical stage-2 compilers. A formal proof is given that the latter comparison guarantees that the purported source code and executable of the compiler-under-test correspond, under some assumptions. This method was applied by its author to verify that the C compiler of the GCC suite v. 3.0.4 contained no trojan, using icc v. 11.0 as the different compiler. 23  In practice such verifications are not done by end users, except in extreme circumstances of intrusion detection and analysis, due to the rarity of such sophisticated attacks, and because programs are typically distributed in binary form. Removing backdoors including compiler backdoors is typically done by simply rebuilding a clean system. However, the sophisticated verificat ions are of interest to operating system vendors, to ensure that they are not distributing a compromised system, and in high-security settings, where such attacks are a realistic concern. List of known backdoors  edit  Back Orifice was created in 1998 by hackers from Cult of the Dead Cow group as a remote administration tool. It allowed Windows computers to be remotely controlled over a network and parodied the name of Microsofts BackOffice . The Dual_EC_DRBG cryptographically secure pseudorandom number generator was revealed in 2013 to possibly have a kleptographic backdoor deliberately inserted by NSA, who also had the private key to the backdoor. 4  19  Several backdoors in the unlicensed copies of WordPress plug-ins were discovered in March 2014. 24  They were inserted as obfuscated JavaScript code and silently created, for example, an admin account in the website database. A similar scheme was later exposed in the Joomla plugin. 25  Borland Interbase versions 4.0 through 6.0 had a hard-coded backdoor, put there by the developers. The server code contains a compiled-in backdoor account username politically , password correct , which could be accessed over a network connection a user logging in with this backdoor account could take full control over all Interbase databases. The backdoor was detected in 2001 and a patch was released. 26  27  Juniper Networks backdoor inserted in the year 2008 into the versions of firmware ScreenOS from 6.2.0r15 to 6.2.0r18 and from 6.3.0r12 to 6.3.0r20 28  that gives any user administrative access when using a special master password. 29  See also  edit  BackdoorWin32.Hupigon Backdoor.Win32.Seed Hardware backdoor References  edit   Eckersley, Peter Portnoy, Erica 8 May 2017. Intels Management Engine is a security hazard, and users need a way to disable it . www.eff.org . EFF . Retrieved 15 May 2017 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Hoffman, Chris. Intel Management Engine, Explained The Tiny Computer Inside Your CPU . How-To Geek . Retrieved July 13, 2018 .  Chris Wysopal, Chris Eng. Static Detection of Application Backdoors PDF . Veracode . Retrieved 2015-03-14 .  a b c How a Crypto Backdoor Pitted the Tech World Against the NSA . Wired . 2013-09-24 . Retrieved 5 April 2018 .  Ashok, India 21 June 2017. Hackers using NSA malware DoublePulsar to infect Windows PCs with Monero mining Trojan . International Business Times UK . Retrieved 1 July 2017 .  Microsoft Back Doors . GNU Operating System . Retrieved 1 July 2017 .  NSA backdoor detected on 55,000 Windows boxes can now be remotely removed . Ars Technica. 2017-04-25 . Retrieved 1 July 2017 .  Backdoors and Trojan Horses By the Internet Security Systems X-Force. Information Security Technical Report . 6 4 3157. 2001-12-01. doi  10.1016S1363-41270100405-8 . ISSN   1363-4127 .  Linthicum, David. Caution The clouds backdoor is your datacenter . InfoWorld . Retrieved 2018-11-29 .  Bogus story no Chinese backdoor in military chip . blog.erratasec.com . Retrieved 5 April 2018 .  H.E. Petersen, R. Turn. System Implications of Information Privacy. Proceedings of the AFIPS Spring Joint Computer Conference , vol. 30, pages 291 300. AFIPS Press 1967.  Security Controls for Computer Systems , Technical Report R-609, WH Ware, ed, Feb 1970, RAND Corp .  Larry McVoy November 5, 2003 Linux-Kernel Archive Re BK2CVS problem Archived 2003-11-27 at the Wayback Machine . ussg.iu.edu  Thwarted Linux backdoor hints at smarter hacks  Kevin Poulsen SecurityFocus , 6 November 2003.  SamsungGalaxyBackdoor - Replicant . redmine.replicant.us . Retrieved 5 April 2018 .  a b Thompson, Ken August 1984. Reflections on Trusting Trust PDF . Communications of the ACM . 27 8 761763. Bibcode  1985CACM...28...22S . doi  10.1145358198.358210 .  a b Karger  Schell 2002 .  The strange connection between the NSA and an Ontario tech firm . Retrieved 5 April 2018  via The Globe and Mail.  a b Perlroth, Nicole Larson, Jeff Shane, Scott 5 September 2013. N.S.A. Able to Foil Basic Safeguards of Privacy on Web . The New York Times . Retrieved 5 April 2018 .  Malicious Cryptography Cryptovirology and Kleptography . www.cryptovirology.com . Retrieved 5 April 2018 .  Jargon File entry for backdoor at catb.org, describes Thompson compiler hack  Compile-a-virus  W32Induc-A Sophos labs on the discovery of the Induc-A virus  Wheeler 2009 .  Unmasking Free Premium WordPress Plugins . Sucuri Blog . 2014-03-26 . Retrieved 3 March 2015 .  Sinegubko, Denis 2014-04-23. Joomla Plugin Constructor Backdoor . Securi . Retrieved 13 March 2015 .  Vulnerability Note VU247371 . Vulnerability Note Database . Retrieved 13 March 2015 .  Interbase Server Contains Compiled-in Back Door Account . CERT . Retrieved 13 March 2015 .  Researchers confirm backdoor password in Juniper firewall code . Ars Technica . 2015-12-21 . Retrieved 2016-01-16 .  Zagroenia tygodnia 2015-W52 - Spece.IT . Spece.IT in Polish. 2015-12-23 . Retrieved 2016-01-16 . Further reading  edit  .mw-parser-output .refbeginfont-size90margin-bottom0.5em.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indentsullist-style-typenonemargin-left0.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indentsulli,.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indentsdlddmargin-left0padding-left3.2emtext-indent-3.2emlist-stylenone.mw-parser-output .refbegin-100font-size100 Karger, Paul A. Schell, Roger R. June 1974. Multics Security Evaluation Vulnerability Analysis PDF . Vol II. Karger, Paul A. Schell, Roger R. September 18, 2002. Thirty Years Later Lessons from the Multics Security Evaluation PDF . Computer Security Applications Conference, 2002. Proceedings. 18th Annual . IEEE. pp.  119126. doi  10.1109CSAC.2002.1176285 . Retrieved 2014-11-08 . Wheeler, David A. 7 December 2009. Fully Countering Trusting Trust through Diverse Double-Compiling Ph.D.. Fairfax, VA George Mason University . Retrieved 2014-11-09 . External links  edit  Finding and Removing Backdoors Three Archaic Backdoor Trojan Programs That Still Serve Great Pranks Backdoors removal  List of backdoors and their removal instructions. FAQ Farms Backdoors FAQ  wiki question and answer forum List of backdoors and Removal  v t e Malware topics Infectious malware Computer virus Comparison of computer viruses Computer worm List of computer worms Timeline of computer viruses and worms Concealment Trojan horse Rootkit Backdoor Zombie computer Man-in-the-middle Man-in-the-browser Man-in-the-mobile Clickjacking Malware for profit Privacy-invasive software Adware Spyware Botnet Keystroke logging Form grabbing Web threats Fraudulent dialer Malbot Scareware Rogue security software Ransomware Crimeware By operating system Linux malware Palm OS viruses Mobile malware Macro virus Classic Mac OS viruses MacOS malware iOS malware Android malware Protection Anti-keylogger Antivirus software Browser security Internet security Mobile security Network security Defensive computing Firewall Intrusion detection system Data loss prevention software Countermeasures Computer and network surveillance Operation Bot Roast Honeypot Authority control GND  4704524-3 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleBackdoor_computing oldid914467501  Categories  Types of malware Spyware Espionage techniques Rootkits Cryptography Hidden categories Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Polish-language sources pl Wikipedia references cleanup from June 2017 All articles needing references cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from June 2017 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2019 Articles that may contain original research from June 2019 All articles that may contain original research CS1 long volume value Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers