Network performance From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Network performance refers to measures of service quality of a network as seen by the customer. There are many different ways to measure the performance of a network, as each network is different in nature and design. Performance can also be modeled and simulated instead of measured one example of this is using state transition diagrams to model queuing performance or to use a Network Simulator. Contents 1 Performance measures 1.1 Bandwidth 1.2 Throughput 1.3 Latency 1.4 Jitter 1.5 Error rate 1.6 Interplay of factors 2 Algorithms and protocols 3 Examples of latency or throughput dominated systems 3.1 Satellite 3.2 Deep space communication 3.3 Even deeper space communication 3.4 Offline data transport 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Performance measures  edit  The following measures are often considered important Bandwidth commonly measured in bitssecond is the maximum rate that information can be transferred Throughput is the actual rate that information is transferred Latency the delay between the sender and the receiver decoding it, this is mainly a function of the signals travel time, and processing time at any nodes the information traverses Jitter variation in packet delay at the receiver of the information Error rate the number of corrupted bits expressed as a percentage or fraction of the total sent Bandwidth  edit  Main article Bandwidth computing The available channel bandwidth and achievable signal-to-noise ratio determine the maximum possible throughput. It is not generally possible to send more data than dictated by the Shannon-Hartley Theorem . Throughput  edit  Main article Throughput Throughput is the number of messages successfully delivered per unit time. Throughput is controlled by available bandwidth, as well as the available signal-to-noise ratio and hardware limitations. Throughput for the purpose of this article will be understood to be measured from the arrival of the first bit of data at the receiver, to decouple the concept of throughput from the concept of latency. For discussions of this type the terms throughput and bandwidth are often used interchangeably. The Time Window is the period over which the throughput is measured. Choice of an appropriate time window will often dominate calculations of throughput, and whether latency is taken into account or not will determine whether the latency affects the throughput or not. Latency  edit  Main article Latency engineering The speed of light imposes a minimum propagation time on all electromagnetic signals. It is not possible to reduce the latency below t  s  c m displaystyle tsc_m where s is the distance and c m is the speed of light in the medium. This approximately means 1 extra millisecond roundtrip time RTT for 100  km62miles of distance between hosts. Other delays also occur in intermediate nodes. In packet switched networks delays can occur due to queueing. Jitter  edit  Main article Jitter Jitter is the undesired deviation from true periodicity of an assumed periodic signal in electronics and telecommunications , often in relation to a reference clock source . Jitter may be observed in characteristics such as the frequency of successive pulses, the signal amplitude , or phase of periodic signals. Jitter is a significant, and usually undesired, factor in the design of almost all communications links e.g., USB , PCI-e , SATA , OC-48 . In clock recovery applications it is called timing jitter . 1  Error rate  edit  Main article Bit error rate In digital transmission , the number of bit errors is the number of received bits of a data stream over a communication channel that have been altered due to noise , interference , distortion or bit synchronization errors. The bit error rate or bit error ratio  BER  is the number of bit errors divided by the total number of transferred bits during a studied time interval. BER is a unitless performance measure, often expressed as a percentage . The bit error probability p e is the expectation value of the BER. The BER can be considered as an approximate estimate of the bit error probability. This estimate is accurate for a long time interval and a high number of bit errors. Interplay of factors  edit  All of the factors above, coupled with user requirements and user perceptions, play a role in determining the perceived fastness or utility, of a network connection. The relationship between throughput, latency, and user experience is most aptly understood in the context of a shared network medium, and as a scheduling problem. Algorithms and protocols  edit  For some systems, latency and throughput are coupled entities. In TCPIP, latency can also directly affect throughput. In TCP connections, the large bandwidth-delay product of high latency connections, combined with relatively small TCP window sizes on many devices, effectively causes the throughput of a high latency connection to drop sharply with latency. This can be remedied with various techniques, such as increasing the TCP congestion window size, or more drastic solutions, such as packet coalescing, TCP acceleration , and forward error correction , all of which are commonly used for high latency satellite links. TCP acceleration converts the TCP packets into a stream that is similar to UDP . Because of this, the TCP acceleration software must provide its own mechanisms to ensure the reliability of the link, taking the latency and bandwidth of the link into account, and both ends of the high latency link must support the method used. In the Media Access Control MAC layer, performance issues such as throughput and end-to-end delay are also addressed. Examples of latency or throughput dominated systems  edit  Many systems can be characterized as dominated either by throughput limitations or by latency limitations in terms of end-user utility or experience. In some cases, hard limits such as the speed of light present unique problems to such systems and nothing can be done to correct this. Other systems allow for significant balancing and optimization for best user experience. Satellite  edit  A telecom satellite in geosynchronous orbit imposes a path length of at least 71000  km between transmitter and receiver. 2  which means a minimum delay between message request and message receipt, or latency of 473 ms. This delay can be very noticeable and affects satellite phone service regardless of available throughput capacity. Deep space communication  edit  These long path length considerations are exacerbated when communicating with space probes and other long-range targets beyond Earths atmosphere. The Deep Space Network implemented by NASA is one such system that must cope with these problems. Largely latency driven, the GAO has criticized the current architecture. 3  Several different methods have been proposed to handle the intermittent connectivity and long delays between packets, such as delay-tolerant networking . 4  Even deeper space communication  edit  At interstellar distances, the difficulties in designing radio systems that can achieve any throughput at all are massive. In these cases, maintaining communication is a bigger issue than how long that communication takes. Offline data transport  edit  Transportation is concerned almost entirely with throughput, which is why physical deliveries of backup tape archives are still largely done by vehicle. See also  edit  Bitrate Measuring network throughput Network traffic measurement Response time Notes  edit   Wolaver, 1991, p.211  Roddy, 2001, 67 - 90  U.S. Government Accounting Office GAO, 2006  Kevin Fall, 2003 References  edit  Rappaport, Theodore S. 2002. Wireless communications   principles and practice 2 ed.. Upper Saddle River, NJ Prentice Hall PTR. ISBN   0-13-042232-0 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em Roddy, Dennis 2001. Satellite communications 3. ed.. New York u.a. McGraw-Hill. ISBN   0-07-137176-1 . Fall, Kevin, A Delay-Tolerant Network Architecture for Challenged Internets , Intel Corporation, February, 2003, Doc No IRB-TR-03-003 Government Accountability Office GAO report 06-445, NASAS DEEP SPACE NETWORK Current Management Structure is Not Conducive to Effectively Matching Resources with Future Requirements, April 27, 2006 External links  edit  NASAs Deep Space Network Website Its the Latency, Stupid v t e Computer science Note This template roughly follows the 2012 ACM Computing Classification System . Hardware Printed circuit board Peripheral Integrated circuit Very Large Scale Integration Systems on Chip SoCs Energy consumption Green computing Electronic design automation Hardware acceleration Computer systems organization Computer architecture Embedded system Real-time computing Dependability Networks Network architecture Network protocol Network components Network scheduler Network performance evaluation Network service Software organization Interpreter Middleware Virtual machine Operating system Software quality Software notations and tools Programming paradigm Programming language Compiler Domain-specific language Modeling language Software framework Integrated development environment Software configuration management Software library Software repository Software development Software development process Requirements analysis Software design Software construction Software deployment Software maintenance Programming team Open-source model Theory of computation Model of computation Formal language Automata theory Computational complexity theory Logic Semantics Algorithms Algorithm design Analysis of algorithms Algorithmic efficiency Randomized algorithm Computational geometry Mathematics of computing Discrete mathematics Probability Statistics Mathematical software Information theory Mathematical analysis Numerical analysis Information systems Database management system Information storage systems Enterprise information system Social information systems Geographic information system Decision support system Process control system Multimedia information system Data mining Digital library Computing platform Digital marketing World Wide Web Information retrieval Security Cryptography Formal methods Security services Intrusion detection system Hardware security Network security Information security Application security Humancomputer interaction Interaction design Social computing Ubiquitous computing Visualization Accessibility Concurrency Concurrent computing Parallel computing Distributed computing Multithreading Multiprocessing Artificial intelligence Natural language processing Knowledge representation and reasoning Computer vision Automated planning and scheduling Search methodology Control method Philosophy of artificial intelligence Distributed artificial intelligence Machine learning Supervised learning Unsupervised learning Reinforcement learning Multi-task learning Cross-validation Graphics Animation Rendering Image manipulation Graphics processing unit Mixed reality Virtual reality Image compression Solid modeling Applied computing E-commerce Enterprise software Computational mathematics Computational physics Computational chemistry Computational biology Computational social science Computational engineering Computational healthcare Digital art Electronic publishing Cyberwarfare Electronic voting Video games Word processing Operations research Educational technology Document management Book Category Portal Outline WikiProject Commons Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleNetwork_performance oldid903371390  Categories  Network performance Computing comparisons Information theory