Question From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search To ask questions about Wikipedia, see WikipediaQuestions . For other uses, see Question disambiguation .  There are these four ways of answering questions. Which four There are questions that should be answered categorically straightforwardly yes, no, this, that. There are questions that should be answered with an analytical qualified answer defining or redefining the terms. There are questions that should be answered with a counter-question. There are questions that should be put aside. These are the four ways of answering questions.     Buddha , Sutta Pitaka 1  A question is an utterance which typically functions as a request for information, which is expected to be provided in the form of an answer . Questions can thus be understood as a kind of illocutionary act in the field of pragmatics or as special kinds of propositions in frameworks of formal semantics such as alternative semantics or inquisitive semantics . Questions are often conflated with interrogatives , which are the grammatical forms typically used to achieve them. Rhetorical questions , for example, are interrogative in form but may not be considered true questions as they are not expected to be answered. Conversely, non-interrogative grammatical structures may be considered questions as in the case of the imperative sentence tell me your name. Contents 1 Uses 1.1 By purpose 1.2 By grammatical form 2 Grammar 3 Responses 4 Learning 5 Philosophy 6 Origins 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading Uses  edit  Jonathan Dimbleby questioning  BBC World Service The principal use of questions is to elicit information from the person being addressed by indicating the information which the speaker or writer desires. 2  However, questions can also be used for a number of other purposes. Questions may be asked for the purpose of testing someones knowledge, as in a quiz or examination . These are termed display questions . 3  Raising a question may guide the questioner along an avenue of research see Socratic method . A research question is an interrogative statement that manifests the objective or line of scholarly or scientific inquiry designed to address a specific gap in knowledge. Research questions are expressed in a language that is appropriate for the academic community that has the greatest interest in answers that would address said gap. These interrogative statements serve as launching points for th e academic pursuit of new knowledge by directing and delimiting an investigation of a topic, a set of studies, or an entire program of research. A rhetorical question is asked to make a point, and does not expect an answer often the answer is implied or obvious. As such, it is not a true question. Similarly, requests for things other than information, as with Would you pass the salt are interrogative in form, but are not true questions. Pre-suppositional or loaded questions , such as Have you stopped beating your wife may be used as a joke or to embarrass an audience, because any answer a person could give would imply more information than he was willing to affirm. Questions can also be used as titles of works of literature, art and scholarship. Examples include Leo Tolstoy s short story How Much Land Does a Man Need , the painting And When Did You Last See Your Father , the movie What About Bob , and the academic work Who Asked the First Question By purpose  edit  Various categorizations of questions have been proposed.  by whom  With regard to research projects, one system distinguishes 4  descriptive questions , used primarily with the aim of describing the existence of some thing or process relational questions , designed to look at the relationships between two or more variables causal questions , designed to determine whether certain variables affect one or more outcome variables For the purpose of surveys, one type of question asked is the closed-ended also closed or dichotomous  question, usually requiring a yesno answer or the choice of an options from a list see also multiple choice . There are also nominal questions , designed to inquire about a level of quantitative measure, usually making connections between a number and a concept as in 1  Moderate 2  Severe 3  .... 5  Open-ended or open questions give the respondent greater freedom to provide information or opinions on a topic. The distinction between closed and open questions is applied in a variety of other contexts too, such as job interviewing . Surveys also often contain qualifying questions also called filter questions or contingency questions , which serve to determine whether the respondent needs to continue on to answer subsequent questions. Some types of questions that may be used in an educational context are listed in Blooms Taxonomy of educational objectives. These include questions designed to test and promote Knowledge Who, what, when, where, why, how  .  .  .   Describe  .  .  .   Comprehension Retell  .  .  .   Application How is  .  .  .  an example of  .  .  .   How is  .  .  .  related to  .  .  .   Why is  .  .  .  significant Analysis What are the parts or features of  .  .  .   Classify  .  .  .  according to  .  .  .   Synthesis What would you infer from  .  .  .   What ideas can you add to  .  .  .   How would you design a new  .  .  .   What would happen if you combined  .  .  .   What solutions would you suggest for  .  .  .   Evaluation Do you agree that  .  .  .   What do you think about  .  .  .   What is the most important  .  .  .   Place the following in order of priority  .  .  .   How would you decide about  .  .  .   What criteria would you use to assess  .  .  .   6  McKenzies Questioning Toolkit 7  lists 17 types of questions, and suggests that thinkers need to orchestrate and combine these types. 8  Examples of these question types include the irreverent question , the apparently irrelevant question , the hypothetical question and the unanswerable question . Questions can also be infelicitous , being based on incorrect and illogical premises e.g. Why do cats have green wings or ill-placed premises e.g. When did you start beating your wife. Strategic studies also took into consideration the questioning process. In Humint Human Intelligence, a taxonomy of questions includes Direct questions basic questions normally beginning with an interrogative who, what, where, when, how, or why and requiring a narrative answer. They are brief, precise, and simply worded to avoid confusion. Initial questions directed toward obtaining the basic information on the topic. In other words, they are the who, what, where, when, how, and why of each topic. Follow-up questions used to expand on and complete the information obtained from the initial questions. Nonpertinent questions questions that do not pertain to the collection objectives. They are used to conceal the collection objectives or to strengthen rapport with the source. Repeat questions ask the source for the same information obtained in response to earlier questions. Control questions developed from recently confirmed information from other sources that is not likely to have changed. Prepared questions developed by the HUMINT collector, normally in writing, prior to the questioning. Prepared questions used primarily when dealing with information of a technical nature or specific topic. Negative questions questions that contain a negative word in the question itself such as, Didnt you go to the pick-up point Compound questions consist of two questions asked at the same time for example, Where were you going after work and who were you to meet there Vague questions do not have enough information for the source to understand exactly what the HUMINT collector is asking. They may be incomplete, general, or otherwise nonspecific. Elicitation is the gaining of information through direct interaction with a human source where the source is not aware of the specific purpose for the conversation. 9  Softball question question on easy, not serious or not important topic Hardball question confronting question, pressing the answerer to explain e.g. inconsistencies or discrepancies with their previous stances Gotcha question By grammatical form  edit  Questions that ask whether or not some statement is true are called yesno questions or polar questions , or general questions 10  , since they can in principle be answered by a yes or no or similar words or expressions in other languages. Examples include Do you take sugar, Should they be believed and Am I the loneliest person in the world A type of question that is similar in form to a yesno question, but is not intended to be answered with a yes or no, is the alternative question 11  or choice question . This presents two or more alternative answers, as in Do you want fish or lamb, or Are you supporting England, Ireland or Wales The expected response is one of the alternatives, or some other indication such as both or neither questionnaire forms sometimes contain an option none of the above or similar for such questions. Because of their similarity in form to y esno questions, they may sometimes be answered yes or no, possibly humorously or as a result of misunderstanding. The other main type of question other than yesno questions is those called wh -questions or non-polar questions , or special questions 10  . These use interrogative words  wh -words such as when , which , who , how , etc. to specify the information that is desired. In some languages the formation of such questions may involve wh -movement  see the section below for grammatical description. The name derives from the fact that most of the English interrogative words with the exception of how  begin with the letters wh . These are the types of question sometimes referred to in journalism and other investigative contexts as the Five Ws . Tag questions are a grammatical structure in which a declarative statement or an imperative is turned into a question by adding an interrogative fragment the tag, such as right in You remembered the eggs, right, or isnt it in Its cold today, isnt it Tag questions may or may not be answerable with a yes or no. As well as direct questions such as Where are my keys , there also exist indirect questions also called interrogative content clauses , such as where my keys are . These are used as subordinate clauses in sentences such as I wonder where my keys are and Ask him where my keys are. Indirect questions do not necessarily follow the same rules of grammar as direct questions. 12  For example, in English and some other languages, indirect questions are formed without inversion of subject and verb compare the word order in where are they and I wonder where they are. Indirect questions may also be subject to the changes of tense and other changes that apply generally to indirect speech . Grammar  edit  Main article Interrogative Languages may use both syntax and prosody to distinguish interrogative sentences which pose questions from declarative sentences which state propositions. Syntax refers to grammatical changes, such as moving words around or adding question words prosody refers here to changes in intonation while speaking. In English , German , French and various other languages, questions are marked by a distinct word order featuring inversion  the subject is placed after the verb rather than before it You are cold becomes Are you cold However, English allows such inversion only with a particular class of verbs called auxiliary or special verbs , and thus sometimes requires the addition of an auxiliary do , does or did before inversion can take place He sings  Does he sing  for details see do -support . In some languages, yesno questions are marked by an interrogative particle , such as the Japanese  ka , Mandarin  ma and Polish czy . Also, in languages generally, wh -questions are marked by an interrogative word  wh -word such as what , where or how . In languages such as English this word generally moves to the front of the sentence  wh -fronting , and subjectverb inversion occurs as in yesno questions, but in some other languages these changes in word order are not necessary e.g. Mandarin  n yo shnme , meaning what do you want is literally you want what. Intonation patterns characteristic of questions often involve a raised pitch near the end of the sentence. In English this occurs especially for yesno questions it may also be used for sentences that do not have the grammatical form of questions, but are nonetheless intended to elicit information  declarative questions , as in Youre not using this In languages written in Latin , Cyrillic or certain other scripts, a question mark at the end of a sentence identifies questions in writing. In Spanish an additional inverted mark is placed at the beginning Cmo est usted How are you As with intonation, this feature is not restricted to sentences having the grammatical form of questions  it may also indicate a sentences pragmatic function. Responses  edit  The most typical response to a question is an answer that provides the information indicated as being sought by the questioner. This may range from a simple yes or no in the case of yesno questions to a more complex or detailed answer. An answer may be correct or incorrect , depending on whether the information it presents is true or false . An indication of inability or unwillingness to provide an answer is the other response to a question. Negative questions are interrogative sentences which contain negation in their phrasing, such as Shouldnt you be working These can have different ways of expressing affirmation and denial from the standard form of question, and they can be confusing, since it is sometimes unclear whether the answer should be the opposite of the answer to the non-negated question. For exam ple, if one does not have a passport, both Do you have a passport and Dont you have a passport are properly answered with No, despite apparently asking opposite questions. The Japanese and Korean languages avoid this ambiguity. Answering No to the second of these in Japanese or Korean would mean, I do have a passport. A similar ambiguous question in English is Do you mind if... The responder may reply unambiguously Yes, I do mind, if they do mind, or No, I dont mind, if they dont, but a simple No or Yes answer can lead to confusion, as a single No can seem like a Yes, I do mind as in No, please dont do that, and a Yes can seem like a No, I dont mind as in Yes, go ahead. An easy way to bypass this confusion would be to ask a non-negative question, such as Is it all right with you if... Some languages have different particles for example the French  si , the German  doch  or the Danish and Norwegian  jo  to answer negative questions or negative statements in an affirmative way they provide a means to express contradiction. More information on these issues can be found in the articles yesno question , yes and no , and answer ellipsis . Learning  edit  Questions are used from the most elementary stage of learning to original research. In the scientific method , a question often forms the basis of the investigation and can be considered a transition between the observation and hypothesis stages. Students of all ages use questions in their learning of topics, and the skill of having learners creating investigatable questions is a central part of inquiry education . The Socratic method of questioning student responses may be used by a teacher to lead the student towards the truth without direct instruction, and also helps students to form logical conclusions. A widespread and accepted use of questions in an educational context is the assessment of students knowledge through exams . Philosophy  edit  This section does not cite any sources . Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .  November 2018   Learn how and when to remove this template message  Philosophical questions are conceptual , not factual questions. There are questions that are not fully answered by any other. Philosophy deals with questions that arise when people reflect on their lives and their world. Some philosophical questions are practical for example, Is euthanasia justifiable, Does the state have the right to censor pornography or restrict tobacco advertising, To what extent are Mori and Pkeh today responsible for decisions made by their ancestors Other philosophical questions are more theoretical , although they often arise through thinking about practical issues. The questions just listed, for example, may prompt more general philosophical questions about the circumstances under which it may be morally justifiable to take a life, or about the extent to which the state may restrict the liberty of the individual. Some classic questions of philosophy are speculative and theoretical and concern the nature of knowledge, reality and human existence for example, What, if anything, can be known with certainty, Is the mind essentially non-physical, Are values absolute or relative, Does the universe need explanation in terms of a Supreme Intelligence, What, if anything, is the meaning or purpose of human existence Finally, the philos ophical questions are typically about conceptual issues they are often questions about our concepts and the relation between our concepts and the world they represent. Every question implies a statement and every statement implies a question. 13  Origins  edit  Enculturated apes Kanzi , Washoe , Sarah and a few others who underwent extensive language training programs with the use of gestures and other visual forms of communications successfully learned to answer quite complex questions and requests including question words who what, where, although so far they have failed to learn how to ask questions themselves . For example, David and Anne Premack wrote Though she Sarah understood the question, she did not herself ask any questions  unlike the child who asks interminable questions, such as What that Who making noise When Daddy come home Me go Grannys house Where puppy Sarah never delayed the departure of her trainer after her lessons by asking where the trainer was going, when she was returning, or anything e lse. 14  The ability to ask questions is often assessed in relation to comprehension of syntactic structures . It is widely accepted that the first questions are asked by humans during their early infancy, at the pre-syntactic, one word stage of language development , with the use of question intonation . 15  See also  edit  Debate Doubt Phrasal exclamation Inquiry Interrobang Interrogation Interrogative word Interrogatory Inquisitive semantics Leading question Logic No such thing as a stupid question Problem Proposition Rhetorical question Reply Sentence linguistics Sentence function Truth Twenty Questions Who Asked the First Question References  edit   Source for quotation Archived February 10, 2006, at the Wayback Machine  Searle, J 1969. Speech acts . Cambridge Cambridge University Press . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Searle, J 1969. Speech acts . Cambridge Cambridge University Press. p.  69.  Research Methods Knowledge Base . Socialresearchmethods.net. 2006-10-20 . Retrieved 2012-06-06 .  Research Methods Knowledge Base. Types of Questions. Socialresearchmethods.net  Types of Questions Based on Blooms Taxonomy. Bloom, et al., 1956.  full citation needed   Questioning Toolkit  Punchy Question Combinations  Headquarters, Department of the Army 2006. Human Intelligence Collector Operations. FM 2-22.3, Washington, DC, 6 September 2006. p. 167. Publication available at army knowledge online www.us.army.mil.  a b William Chisholm, Louis T. Milic, John A.C. Greppin. Interrogativity.  John Benjamins Publishing, 1982.  Loos, Eugene E. Anderson, Susan Day, Dwight H., Jr. Jordan, Paul C. Wingate, J. Douglas eds.. What is an alternative question . Glossary of linguistic terms . SIL International.  Indirect Questions - English Grammar Lesson - ELC . ELC - English Language Center . 2017-11-27 . Retrieved 2018-01-24 .  Paul, Richard and Elder, Linda. 2005 Critical Thinking Tools for Taking Charge of Your Learning and Your Life, New Jersey Prentice Hall Publishing. ISBN   0-13-114962-8  Premack, David Premack, Ann J. 1983. The mind of an ape . New York, London W. W. Norton  Company . p.  29.  Crystal, David 1987. The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Language . Cambridge. Pg. 241, 143 Cambridge University. Further reading  edit  Look up question in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Wikiquote has quotations related to Question Wikiversity has learning resources about CategoryQuestions This list needs to be alphabetized . See HelpSorting . Berti, Enrico, Soggetti di responsabilita questioni di filosofia pratica , Reggio Emilia, 1993. C. L. Hamblin, Questions, in Paul Edwards ed., Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Fieser, James, Lillegard, Norman eds, Philosophical questions readings and interactive guides, 2005. McKenzie, Jamie, Leading questions  From Now On  The Educational Technology Journal, 2007. McKenzie, Jamie, Learning to question to wonder to learn , From Now On  The Educational Technology Journal, 2005. McKenzie, Jamie, The Question Mark Georg Stahl, Un dveloppement de la logique des questions, in Revue Philosophique de la France et de lEtranger 88 1963, 293-301. Dipsita Thakkar,  The Questions to Ask , The psychological theory journal, 2017. Muratta Bunsen, Eduardo, Lo erotico en la pregunta, in Aletheia 5 1999, 65-74. Smith, Joseph Wayne, Essays on ultimate questions critical discussions of the limits of contemporary philosophical inquiry, Aldershot Avebury, 1988. Authority control GND  4018041-4 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleQuestion oldid908990873  Categories  Grammar Human communication Questionnaire construction Interrogative words and phrases Sentences by type Hidden categories Webarchive template wayback links Articles with incomplete citations from November 2012 Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from January 2014 Articles containing Japanese-language text Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles needing additional references from November 2018 All articles needing additional references Lists that need to be alphabetized Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers