Release management From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Release management is the process of managing, planning, scheduling and controlling a software build through different stages and environments including testing and deploying software releases . 1  Contents 1 Background 2 Relationship with Continuous Delivery, DevOps, and Agile software development 3 Relationship with Enterprise Release Management 4 Relationship with ITILITSM 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Background  edit  Release management is a relatively new but rapidly growing discipline within software engineering . As software systems, software development processes , and resources become more distributed, they invariably become more specialized and complex. Furthermore, software products especially web applications  are typically in an ongoing cycle of development, testing , and release , often running on evolving platforms with growing complexity. Such systems require dedicated resources to oversee the integration and flow of development, testing, deployment, and support. Relationship with Continuous Delivery, DevOps, and Agile software development  edit  Organizations that have adopted agile software development are seeing much higher quantities of releases  citation needed  . With the increasing popularity of agile development a new approach to software releases known as Continuous delivery is starting to influence how software transitions from development to a release. 2  One goal of Continuous Delivery and DevOps is to release more reliable applications faster and more frequently. The movement of the application from a build through different environments to production as a release is part of the Continuous Delivery pipeline. 3  Release managers are beginning to utilize tools such as application release automation and continuous integration tools to help advance the process of Continuous Delivery and incorporate a culture of DevOps by automating a task so that it can be done more quickly, reliably, and is repeatable. More software releases have led to increased reliance on release management and automation tools to execute these complex application release processes. 4  Relationship with Enterprise Release Management  edit  While Release Management focuses on the transitions from development to testing and release for a single project or a collection of related projects, Enterprise Release Management ERM is focused on the coordination of individual releases within a larger organization. An organization with multiple application development groups may require a highly orchestrated series of releases over multiple months or years to implement a large-scale system. ERM involves the coordinated effort of multiple release managers to synchronize releases in the context of a n IT portfolio . Relationship with ITILITSM  edit  In organizations that manage IT operations using the IT Service Management paradigm , specifically the ITIL framework, release management will be guided by ITIL concepts and principles. There are several formal ITIL Processes that are related to release management, primarily the Release and Deployment Management process, which aims to plan, schedule and control the movement of releases to test and live environments., 5  and the Change Management process 6  In ITIL organizations, releases tend to be less frequent than in an agile development environment. Release processes are managed by IT operations teams using IT Service Management ticketing systems, with less focus on automation of release processes. 7  See also  edit  Application release automation Build automation Change management Configuration management DevOps Software testing Continuous testing Test plan DevOps toolchain WinOps References  edit   Humble, Jez Farley, David 2011. Continuous Delivery reliable software releases through build, test, and deployment automation . Pearson Education Inc. p.  110. ISBN   978-0-321-60191-9 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Ambler, Scott W. 12 February 2014. We need more Agile IT Now . Dr. Dobbs The world of software Development . San Francisco UBM.  Humble, Jez Farley, David 2011. Continuous Delivery reliable software releases through build, test, and deployment automation . Pearson Education Inc. pp.  255257. ISBN   978-0-321-60191-9 .  Best Practices in Change, Configuration and Release Management Report. Gartner. 14 July 2010.  ITIL Release and Deployment Management . IT Process Maps . Germany Stefan and Andrea Kempter. 15 May 2016.  Murphy, Vawns 2 Feb 2016. Change vs Release Management . The ITSM Review . UK Enterprise Opinions Limited.  ITILITSM Release Management Practices . Release Management Wiki . USA Electric Cloud. External links  edit  Wikibooks has a book on the topic of Release Management Project Management Best Practices for IT Professionals , p. 193, at Google Books Release Management - Where to Start Release and Deployment Management in the ITIL Framework Release Management Wiki - Compilation of Current Resources about All Aspects of Release Management Managing Software Projects at Google Books Current Trends in Release Engineering 2016 - Academic Course by Software Construction Research Group, RWTH Aachen, Germany Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleRelease_management oldid907604913  Categories  Software project management Version control Software release Hidden categories All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2017