Interaction design From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Interaction design , often abbreviated as IxD , is the practice of designing interactive digital products, environments, systems, and services. 1   xxxi,1 Beyond the digital aspect, interaction design is also useful when creating physical non-digital products, exploring how a user might interact with it. Common topics of interaction design include design , humancomputer interaction , and software development . While interaction design has an interest in form similar to other design fields, its main area of focus rests on behavior. 1   1 Rather than analyzing how things are, interaction design synthesizes and imagines things as they could be. This element of interaction design is what characterizes IxD as a design field as opposed to a science or engineering field. 1   xviii While disciplines such as software engineering have a heavy focus on designing for technical stakeholders, interaction design is geared toward satisfying the majority of users. 1   xviii Contents 1 History 2 Methodologies 2.1 Goal-oriented design 2.2 Usability 2.3 Personas 2.4 Cognitive dimensions 2.5 Affective interaction design 3 Five dimensions 3.1 Words 3.2 Visual representations 3.3 Physical objects or space 3.4 Time 3.5 Behavior 4 Interaction Design Association 5 Related disciplines 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links History  edit  The term interaction design was coined by Bill Moggridge 2  and Bill Verplank in the mid-1980s, but it took 10 years before the concept started to take hold. 1   xviii To Verplank, it was an adaptation of the computer science term user interface design for the industrial design profession. 3  To Moggridge, it was an improvement over soft-face , which he had coined in 1984 to refer to the application of industrial design to products containing software. 4  The earliest programs in design for interactive technologies were the Visible Language Workshop, started by Muriel Cooper at MIT in 1975, and the Interactive Telecommunications Program founded at NYU in 1979 by Martin Elton and later headed by Red Burns. 5  The first academic program officially named Interaction Design was established at Carnegie Mellon University in 1994 as a Master of Design in Interaction Design. 6  At the outset, the program focused mainly on screen interfaces, before shifting to a greater emphasis on the big picture aspects of interactionpeople, organizations, culture, service and system. In 1990, Gillian Crampton Smith founded the Computer-related Design MA at the Royal College of Art RCA in London, changed in 2005 to Design Interactions, 7  headed by Anthony Dunne. 8  In 2001, Crampton Smith helped found the Interaction Design Institute Ivrea , a small institute in Olivettis hometown in Northern Italy, dedicated solely to interaction design. The institute moved to Milan in October 2005 and merged with Domus Academy . In 2007, some of the people originally involved with IDII set up the Copenhagen Institute of Interaction Design CIID. After Ivrea, Crampton Smith and Philip Tabor added the Interaction Design IxD track in the Visual and Multimedia Communication at Iuav, University of Venice, Italy, between 2006 and 2014. In 1998, the Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research founded The Interactive Institute a Swedish research institute in the field of interaction design. Methodologies  edit  Goal-oriented design  edit  Goal-oriented design or Goal-Directed design is concerned with satisfying the needs and desires of the users of a product or service. 1   xviii Alan Cooper argues in The Inmates Are Running the Asylum that we need a new approach to solving interactive software-based problems. 9   1 The problems with designing computer interfaces are fundamentally different from those that do not include software e.g., hammers. Cooper introduces the concept of cognitive friction, which is when the interface of a design is complex and difficult to use, and behaves inconsistently and unexpectedly, possessing different modes. 9   22 Alternatively, interfaces can be designed to serve the needs of the serviceproduct provider. User needs may be poorly served by this approach. Usability  edit  Usability answers the question can someone use this interface. Jacob Nielsen describes usability as the quality attribute 10  that describes how usable the interface is. Shneiderman proposes principles for designing more usable interfaces called Eight Golden Rules of Interface Design 11  which are well-known heuristics for creating usable systems. Personas  edit  Personas are archetypes that describe the various goals and observed behaviour patterns among users. 12  A persona encapsulates critical behavioural data in a way that both designers and stakeholders can understand, remember, and relate to. Personas use storytelling to engage users social and emotional aspects, which helps designers to either visualize the best product behaviour or see why the recommended design is successful. 12  Cognitive dimensions  edit  The cognitive dimensions framework 13  provides a vocabulary to evaluate and modify design solutions. Cognitive dimensions offer a lightweight approach to analysis of a design quality, rather than an in-depth, detailed description. They provide a common vocabulary for discussing notation, user interface or programming language design. Dimensions provide high-level descriptions of the interface and how the user interacts with it examples include consistency , error-proneness , hard mental operations , viscosity and premature commitment . These concepts aid the creation of new designs from existing ones through design maneuvers that alter the design within a particular dimension. Affective interaction design  edit  Designers must be aware of elements that influence user emotional responses. For instance, products must convey positive emotions while avoiding negative ones. 14  Other important aspects include motivational, learning, creative, social and persuasive influences. One method that can help convey such aspects is for example, the use of dynamic icons, animations and sound to help communicate, creating a sense of interactivity. Interface aspects such as fonts, color palettes and graphical layouts can influence acceptance. Studies showed that affective aspects can affect perceptions of usability. 14  Emotion and pleasure theories exist to explain interface responses. These include Don Norman s emotional design model, Patrick Jordans pleasure model 15  and McCarthy and Wrights Technology as Experience framework. 16  See also Interaction cost Five dimensions  edit  The concept of dimensions of interaction design were introduced in Moggridges book Designing Interactions. Crampton Smith wrote that interaction design draws on four existing design languages, 1D, 2D, 3D, 4D. 17  Silver later proposed a fifth dimension, behaviour. 18  Words  edit  This dimension defines interactions words are the element that users interact with. Visual representations  edit  Visual representations are the elements of an interface that the user perceives these may include but are not limited to typography, diagrams, icons, and other graphics. Physical objects or space  edit  This dimension defines the objects or space with which or within which users interact. Time  edit  The time during which the user interacts with the interface. An example of this includes content that changes over time such as sound, video or animation. Behavior  edit  Behaviour defines how users respond to the interface. Users may have different reactions in this interface. Interaction Design Association  edit  The Interaction Design Association 19  was created in 2003 to serve the community. The organization has over 80,000 members and more than 173 local groups. 20  IxDA hosts Interaction 21  the annual interaction design conference, and the Interaction Awards. 22  Related disciplines  edit  Industrial design 23  The core principles of industrial design overlap with those of interaction design. Industrial designers use their knowledge of physical form , color, aesthetics , human perception and desire, and usability to create a fit of an object with the person using it. Human factors and ergonomics Certain basic principles of ergonomics provide grounding for interaction design. These include anthropometry , biomechanics , kinesiology , physiology and psychology as they relate to human behavior in the built environment. Cognitive psychology 23  Certain basic principles of cognitive psychology provide grounding for interaction design. These include mental models , mapping, interface metaphors , and affordances . Many of these are laid out in Donald Norman s influential book The Design of Everyday Things . Humancomputer interaction 23  Academic research in humancomputer interaction HCI includes methods for describing and testing the usability of interacting with an interface, such as cognitive dimensions and the cognitive walkthrough . Design research Interaction designers are typically informed through iterative cycles of user research. User research is used to identify the needs, motivations and behaviors of end users. They design with an emphasis on user goals and experience, and evaluate designs in terms of usability and affective influence. Architecture 23  As interaction designers increasingly deal with ubiquitous computing , urban informatics and urban computing , the architects ability to make, place, and create context becomes a point of contact between the disciplines. User interface design Like user interface design and experience design , interaction design is often associated with the design of system interfaces in a variety of media but concentrates on the aspects of the interface that define and present its behavior over time, with a focus on developing the system to respond to the users experience and not the other way around. See also  edit  Design portal Chief experience officer CXO Data presentation architecture Hardware interface design Human interface guidelines user friendly computer application designs Information architecture Instructional design Interaction Design Foundation Interaction design pattern Interactive systems engineering Interactivity Interface design Kinetic user interface Mobile interaction Service design Sonic interaction design Transgenerational design Usability User experience design User-centered design Web literacy creating interactive experiences on the web Media psychology References  edit   a b c d e f Cooper, Alan  Reimann, Kaye Keezer, Leiben 2007. About Face 3 The Essentials of Interaction Design . Indianapolis, Indiana  Wiley . p.  610. ISBN   978-0-470-08411-3 . Retrieved 18 July 2011 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Integrate business modeling and interaction design . 8 June 2007. Archived from the original on 12 February 2008. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Bill Verplank - Professional . Archived from the original on 23 January 2008. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help    Moggridge, Bill 2007. Designing Interactions . MIT Press . ISBN   0-262-13474-8 .  Martin, Douglas 26 August 2013. Red Burns, Godmother of Silicon Alley, Dies at 88 . The New York Times . ISSN   0362-4331 . Archived from the original on 24 May 2016 . Retrieved 1 August 2016 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Archived copy . Archived from the original on 30 November 2012 . Retrieved 3 December 2012 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  CS1 maint archived copy as title  link   RCA Design Interactions Website Archived 10 July 2010 at the Wayback Machine  RCA Design Interactions About Students Staff  Guests Research Graduating Projects Archived 5 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine  a b Cooper, Alan 2004. Inmates Are Running the Asylum, The Why High-Tech Products Drive Us Crazy and How to Restore the Sanity . Sams Publishing. p.  288. ISBN   0-672-32614-0 .  Usability 101 Introduction to Usability . nngroup.com . Archived from the original on 1 September 2016. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Shneidermans Eight Golden Rules of Interface Design . faculty.washington.edu . Archived from the original on 9 January 2017. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   a b Goodwin, Kim 2009. Designing for the Digital Age . Wiley. p.  229. ISBN   978-0-470-22910-1 .  T. R. G. Green . Instructions and Descriptions some cognitive aspects of programming and similar activities . Archived from the original on 29 July 2011. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   a b Sharp, Helen Rogers, Yvonne Preece, Jenny 2007. Interaction Design Beyond HumanComputer Interaction 2nd ed.. John Wiley  Sons . pp.  181217 184.  httpchangingminds.orgexplanationsemotionshappinessfour_pleasures.htm  httpsmitpress.mit.edubookstechnology-experience  Moggridge, Bill 2007. Designing Interactions . The MIT Press. ISBN   978-0-262-13474-3 .  Silver, Kevin. What Puts the Design in Interaction Design . UX Matters. Archived from the original on 15 November 2011 . Retrieved 6 March 2012 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Interaction Design Association  IxDA . Archived from the original on 2 June 2016. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Interaction Design Association - Homepage  IxDA . www.ixda.org . Archived from the original on 2 June 2016 . Retrieved 3 June 2016 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Interaction 16 . Archived from the original on 17 November 2015. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Home IxD Awards . Archived from the original on 13 October 2013. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   a b c d Disciplines  Domains of Interaction Design . Further reading  edit  Bolter, Jay D. Gromala, Diane 2008. Windows and Mirrors Interaction Design, Digital Art, and the Myth of Transparency . Cambridge, Massachusetts MIT Press . ISBN   0-262-02545-0 . Buchenau, Marion Suri, Jane Fulton. Experience Prototyping . DIS 2000. ISBN   1-58113-219-0 . Buxton, Bill 2005. Sketching the User Experience . New Riders Press . ISBN   0-321-34475-8 . Cooper, Alan 1999. The Inmates are Running the Asylum . Sams. ISBN   0672316498 . Cooper, Alan  Reimann, Robert Cronin, David Noessel, Christopher 2014. About Face 4th ed.. Wiley. ISBN   9781118766576 . Dawes, Brendan 2007. Analog In, Digital Out . Berkeley, California New Riders Press . Goodwin, Kim 2009. Designing for the Digital Age How to Create Human-Centered Products and Services . ISBN   978-0-470-22910-1 . Houde, Stephanie Hill, Charles 1997. What Do Prototypes Prototype. In Helander, M Landauer, T Prabhu, P eds.. Handbook of HumanComputer Interaction 2nd ed.. Elsevier Science . Jones, Matt  Gary Marsden Mobile Interaction Design , John Wiley  Sons, 2006, ISBN   0-470-09089-8 . Kolko, Jon 2009. Thoughts on Interaction Design . ISBN   978-0-12-378624-1 . Laurel, Brenda Lunenfeld, Peter 2003. Design Research Methods and Perspectives . MIT Press . ISBN   0-262-12263-4 . Tinauli, Musstanser Pillan, Margherita 2008. Interaction Design and Experiential Factors A Novel Case Study on Digital Pen and Paper. Mobility 08 Proceedings of the International Conference on Mobile Technology, Applications, and Systems . New York ACM . doi  10.11451506270.1506400 . ISBN   978-1-60558-089-0 . Norman, Donald 1988. The Design of Everyday Things . New York Basic Books . ISBN   978-0-465-06710-7 . Raskin, Jef 2000. The Humane Interface . ACM Press . ISBN   0-201-37937-6 . Saffer, Dan 2006. Designing for Interaction . New Riders Press . ISBN   0-321-43206-1 . External links  edit  v t e Design Outline Portal Designer Disciplines Communication design Advertising Book design Corporate design Exhibit design Film title design Graphic design Motion Postage stamp design Print design Illustration Information design Instructional design News design Photography Retail design Signage   Traffic sign design Typography   Type design Video design Visual merchandising Environmental design Architecture Architectural lighting design Building design Passive solar Ecological design Environmental impact design Garden design Computer-aided Healthy community design Hotel design Interior architecture Interior design EID Keyline design Landscape architecture Sustainable Landscape design Spatial design Urban design Industrial design Automotive design Automotive suspension design CMF design Corrugated box design Electric guitar design Furniture design Sustainable Hardware interface design Motorcycle design Packaging and labeling Photographic lens design Product design Production design Sensory design Service design Interaction design Experience design EED Game design Level design Video game design Hardware interface design Icon design Immersive design Information design Sonic interaction design User experience design User interface design Web design Other applied arts Public art design Ceramic   glass design Fashion design Costume design Jewelry design Floral design Game art design Property design Scenic design Sound design Stageset lighting design Textile design Other design  engineering Algorithm design Behavioural design Boiler design Database design Drug design Electrical system design Experimental design Filter design Geometric design Job design Integrated circuit design Circuit design Physical design Power network design Mechanism design Nuclear weapon design Nucleic acid design Organization design Process design Processor design Protein design Research design Social design Software design Spacecraft design Strategic design Systems design Approaches Activity-centered Adaptive web Affective Brainstorming By committee By contract C-K theory Closure Co-design Concept-oriented Configuration Contextual Continuous Cradle-to-cradle Creative problem-solving Creativity techniques Critical Design fiction Defensive Designbidbuild Designbuild architect-led Domain-driven Ecodesign Energy neutral Engineering design process Probabilistic design Error-tolerant Fault-tolerant Framework-oriented For assembly For behaviour change For manufacturability For Six Sigma For testing For X Functional Generative Geodesign HCD High-level Inclusive Integrated Integrated topside Intelligence-based Iterative KISS principle Low-level Metadesign Mind mapping Modular New Wave Object-oriented Open Parametric Participatory Platform-based Policy-based Process-centered Public interest Rational Regenerative Reliability engineering Research-based Responsibility-driven RWD Safe-life Sustainable Systemic SOD Tableless web Theory of constraints Top-down and bottom-up Transformation Transgenerational TRIZ Universal Design for All Usage-centered Use-centered User-centered Empathic User innovation Value-driven Value sensitive Privacy by Design choice computing controls flow leadership management marker methods pattern research science sprint strategy theory thinking Tools Intellectual property Organizations Awards Tools AAD Architectural model Blueprint Comprehensive layout CAD CAID Virtual home design software CAutoD Design quality indicator Electronic design automation Flowchart Mockup Product design specification Prototype Sketch Storyboard Technical drawing Web design program Website wireframe Intellectual property Community design Design around Design patent Fashion design copyright Geschmacksmuster Industrial design rights European Union Organizations AIGA Chartered Society of Designers Design and Industries Association Design Council International Forum Design The Design Society Design Research Society Awards European Design Award German Design Award Good Design Award Chicago Good Design Award Japan Graphex IF product design award James Dyson Award Prince Philip Designers Prize Related topics Aesthetics Agile Concept art Conceptual design Creative industries Cultural icon .design Enterprise architecture Futures studies Indie design Innovation Management Intelligent design Lean Startup New product development OODA Loop Philosophy of design Process simulation Slow design STEAM fields Unintelligent design Visualization Wicked problem Design brief change classic competition architectural student director education elements and principles engineer firm history knowledge language life load museum paradigm rationale review specification studio technology Commons Wikibooks Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wiktionary Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleInteraction_design oldid909691315  Categories  Humancomputer interaction Design Technical communication Usability Multimodal interaction Hidden categories CS1 errors deprecated parameters CS1 maint archived copy as title Webarchive template wayback links Use dmy dates from July 2011