Change management From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search For software version changes, see Change control . For IT service management, see Change management ITSM . Change management sometimes abbreviated as CM  is a collective term for all approaches to prepare, support, and help individuals , teams , and organizations in making organizational change . The most common change drivers include technological evolution, process reviews, crisis , and consumer habit changes pressure from new business entrants, acquisitions , mergers , and organizational restructuring. 1  It includes methods that redirect or redefine the use of resources, business process , budget allocations, or other modes of operation that significantly change a company or organization. Organizational change management OCM considers the full organization and what needs to change, 2  while change management may be used solely to refer to how people and teams are affected by such organizational transition. It deals with many different disciplines, from behavioral and social sciences to information technology and business solutions. 3  In a project-management context, the term change management may be used as an alternative to change control processes wherein changes to the scope of a project are formally introduced and approved. 4  5  Contents 1 History 1.1 1960s 1.2 1980s 1.3 1990s 1.4 2000s 1.5 2010s 2 Approach 2.1 Reasons for change 2.2 Change models 2.3 The Plan-Do-Check-Act Cycle, and choosing which changes to implement 2.4 Managing the change process 2.5 Factors of successful change management 3 Challenges 3.1 Integration 3.2 Navigation 3.3 Human factors 4 As an academic discipline 5 See also 6 References History  edit  1960s  edit  Many change management models and processes are based with their roots in grief studies. As consultants saw a correlation between grieving from health-related issues and grieving among employees in an organization due to loss of jobs and departments, many early change models captured the full range of human emotions as employees mourned job-related transitions. 6  In his work on diffusion of innovations , Everett Rogers posited that change must be understood in the context of time, communication channels, and its impact on all affected participants. Placing people at the core of change thinking was a fundamental contribution to developing the concept of change management. He proposed the descriptive Adopter groups of how people respond to change Innovators, Early Adopters , Early Majority, Late Majority and Laggards. 7  1980s  edit  McKinsey  Company consultant Julien Phillips published a change management model in 1982 in the journal Human Resource Management , though it took a decade for his change management peers to catch up with him. 8  Robert Marshak has since credited the big 6 accounting and consulting firms with adopting the work of early organizational change pioneers, such as Daryl Conner and Don Harrison, thereby contributing to the legitimization of a whole change management industry when they branded their reengineering services as change management in the 1980s. 9  1990s  edit  In his 1993 book, Managing at the Speed of Change , Daryl Conner coined the term  burning platform  based on the 1988 North Sea Piper Alpha oil rig fire. He went on to found Conner Partners in 1994, focusing on the human performance and adoption techniques that would help ensure technology innovations were absorbed and adopted as best as possible. 10  The first State of the Change Management Industry report was published in the Consultants News in February 1995. 11  2000s  edit  Linda Ackerman Anderson states in Beyond Change Management that in the late 1980s and early 1990s, top leaders, growing dissatisfied with the failures of creating and implementing changes in a top-down fashion, created the role of the change leader to take responsibility for the human side of change. 12  2010s  edit  In Australia, change management is now recognised as a formal vocation through the work of Christina Dean with the Australian government in establishing national competency standards and academic programmes from diploma to masters level. 13  In response to continuing reports of the failure of large-scale top-down plan-driven change programmes, 14  innovative change practitioners have been reporting success with applying Lean and Agile principles to the field of change management. 15  16  The Association of Change Management Professionals ACMP announced a new certification to enhance the profession Certified Change Management Professional CCMP in 2016. 17  Approach  edit  Organizational change management employs a structured approach to ensure that changes are implemented smoothly and successfully to achieve lasting benefits.  citation needed  Reasons for change  edit  Globalization and constant innovation of technology result in a constantly evolving business environment. Phenomena such as social media and mobile adaptability have revolutionized business and the effect of this is an ever-increasing need for change, and therefore change management. The growth in technology also has a secondary effect of increasing the availability and therefore accountability of knowledge. Easily accessible information has resulted in unprecedented scrutiny from stockholders and the media an d pressure on management. With the business environment experiencing so much change, organizations must then learn to become comfortable with change as well. Therefore, the ability to manage and adapt to organizational change is an essential ability required in the workplace today. Yet, major and rapid organizational change is profoundly difficult because the structure, culture , and routines of organizations often reflect a persistent and difficult-to-remove imprint of past periods, which are resistant to radical change even as the current environment of the organization changes rapidly. 18  Due to the growth of technology, modern organizational change is largely motivated by exterior innovations rather than internal factors. When these developments occur, the organizations that adapt quickest create a competitive advantage for themselves, while the companies that refuse to change get left behind. 19  This can result in drastic profit andor market share losses. Organizational change directly affects all departments and employees. The entire company must learn how to handle changes to the organization. The effectiveness of change management can have a strong positive or negative impact on employee morale. Change models  edit  There are several models of change management John Kotters 8-Step Process for Leading Change Dr. John P. Kotter , a pioneer of change management, invented the 8-Step Process for Leading Change Dr. John P. Kotter , the Konosuke Matsushita Professor of Leadership, Emeritus , at the Harvard Business School , invented the 8-Step Process for Leading Change. 20  It consists of eight stages Create a Sense of Urgency Build a Guiding Coalition Form a Strategic Vision and Initiatives Enlist a Volunteer Army Enable Action by Removing Barriers Generate Short-Term Wins Sustain Acceleration Institute Change Change Management Foundation and Model The Change Management Foundation is shaped like a pyramid with project management managing technical aspects and people implementing change at the base and leadership setting the direction at the top. The Change Management Model consists of four stages Determine Need for Change Prepare  Plan for Change Implement the Change Sustain the Change The Plan-Do-Check-Act Cycle, and choosing which changes to implement  edit  The Plan-Do-Check-Act PDCA Cycle created by W. Edwards Deming The Plan-Do-Check-Act Cycle , created by W. Edwards Deming , is a management method to improve business method for control and continuous improvement of choosing which changes to implement. When determining which of the latest techniques or innovations to adopt, there are four major factors to be considered Levels, goals, and strategies Measurement system Sequence of steps Implementation and organizational changes Managing the change process  edit  Change management involves collaboration between all employees, from entry-level to top-management Although there are many types of organizational changes, the critical aspect is a companys ability to win the buy-in of their organizations employees on the change. Effectively managing organizational change is a four-step process 21  Recognizing the changes in the broader business environment Developing the necessary adjustments for their companys needs Training their employees on the appropriate changes 22  Winning the support of the employees with the persuasiveness of the appropriate adjustments As a multi-disciplinary practice that has evolved as a result of scholarly research, organizational change management should begin with a systematic diagnosis of the current situation in order to determine both the need for change and the capability to change. The objectives, content, and process of change should all be specified as part of a change management plan. Change mana gement processes should include creative marketing to enable communication between changing audiences, as well as deep social understanding about leadership styles and group dynamics. As a visible track on transformation projects, organizational change management aligns groups expectations, integrates teams, and manages employee-training. It makes use of performance metrics, s uch as financial results, operational efficiency, leadership commitment, communication effectiveness, and the perceived need for change in order to design appropriate strategies, resolve troubled change projects, and avoid change failures.  citation needed  Factors of successful change management  edit  Successful change management is more likely to occur if the following are included Define measurable stakeholder aims and create a business case for their achievement which should be continuously updated Monitor assumptions, risks, dependencies, costs, return on investment, dis-benefits and cultural issues Effective communication that informs various stakeholders of the reasons for the change why, the benefits of successful implementation what is in it for us, and you as well as the details of the change when where who is involved how much will it cost etc. Devise an effective education, training andor skills upgrading scheme for the organization Counter resistance from the employees of companies and align them to overall strategic direction of the organization Provide personal counseling if required to alleviate any change-related fears Monitoring implementation and fine-tuning as and when required 23  Challenges  edit  Change management is faced with the fundamental difficulties of integration and navigation, and human factors. Change management must also take into account the human aspect where emotions and how they are handled play a significant role in implementing change successfully. Integration  edit  Traditionally, organizational development OD departments overlooked the role of infrastructure and the possibility of carrying out change through technology. Now, managers almost exclusively focus on the structural and technical components of change. 24  Alignment and integration between strategic, social, and technical components requires collaboration between people with different skill-sets. Navigation  edit  Managing change over time, referred to as navigation, requires continuous adaptation. It requires managing projects over time against a changing context, from inter-organizational factors to marketplace volatility. It also requires a balance in bureaucratic organizations between top-down and bottom-up management , ensuring employee empowerment and flexibility. 24  Human factors  edit  One of the major factors which hinders the change management process is peoples natural tendency for inertia. Just as in Newton s first law of motion , people are resistant to change in organisations because it can be uncomfortable. The notion of doing things this way, because this is the way we have always done them, can be particularly hard to overcome. 25  Furthermore, in cases where a company has seen declining fortunes, for a manager or executive to view themselves as a key part of the problem can be very humbling. This issue can be exacerbated in countries where saving face plays a large role in inter-personal relations. To assist with this, a number of models have been developed which help identify their readiness for change and then to recommend the steps through which they could move. A common example is ADKAR, an acronym which stands for A wareness, D esire, K nowledge, A bility and R einforcement. 26  This model was developed by researcher and entrepreneur Jeff Hiatt in 1996 and first published in a white paper entitled The Perfect Change in 1999. 27  Hiatt explained that the process of becoming ready for change is sequential, starting from the current level of each individual, 28  and none of the five steps could be avoided they cannot be skipped or reordered. 29  As an academic discipline  edit  The University of New South Wales offers a Graduate Certificate in Change Management GCCM As change management becomes more necessary in the business cycle of organizations, it is beginning to be taught as its own academic discipline at universities. There are a growing number of universities with research units dedicated to the study of organizational change. See also  edit  Business process reengineering Change management ITSM Employee engagement Human resource management Leadership development Organization studies Organizational culture Organizational structure Performance management Stakeholder management Strategic change Talent management Training and development Transtheoretical model References  edit   Hucmi  Home . International Organizational Change Management Institute . Retrieved 2015-12-08 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Prosci  Filicetti, John August 20, 2007. Project Management Dictionary . PM Hut . Retrieved November 16, 2009 .  Levin, Ginger 2012. Embrace and Exploit Change as a Program Manager Guidelines for Success . Project Management Institute. Archived from the original on September 30, 2013 . Retrieved August 10, 2013 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   Welbourne, Theresa M. Change Management Needs a Change .  Rogers, Everett 16 August 2003. Diffusion of Innovations, 5th Edition . Simon and Schuster. ISBN   978-0-7432-5823-4 .  Phillips, Julien R. 1983. Enhancing the effectiveness of organizational change management. Human Resource Management . 22 12 18399. doi  10.1002hrm.3930220125 .  Marshak, Robert J. 2005. Contemporary Challenges to the Philosophy and Practice of Organization Development . In Bradford, David L. Burke, W. Warner eds.. Reinventing Organization Development New Approaches to Change in Organizations . pp.  1942. ISBN   978-0-7879-8159-4 .  Conner, Daryl August 15, 2012. The Real Story of the Burning Platform .  Whelehan, S. 1995, Capturing a Moving Target Change Management, Consultants News  Anderson, D. Anderson, L. A. 2001, Beyond Change Management Advanced Strategies for Todays Transformational Leaders , San Francisco Jossey-Bass  Pfeiffer , retrieved 2011-12-21  Dean, Christina 2009. RIMER Managing Successful Change . Australia Uniforte Pty Ltd.  Build a change platform, not a change program . McKinsey and Associates . Retrieved 24 March 2016 .  Anderson, Jeff 2013. The Lean Change Method Managing Agile Organizational Transformation Using Kanban, Kotter, and Lean Startup Thinking . CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform.  Little, Jason 2014. Lean Change Management Innovative Practices For Managing Organizational Change . Happy Melly Express.  ACMPs Certified Change Management Professional programme . The Association of Change Management Professionals . Retrieved 20 November 2015 .  Marquis, Christopher Tilcsik, Andrs 2013. Imprinting Toward A Multilevel Theory. Academy of Management Annals  193243. SSRN   2198954 .  Skelsey, Dan 29 July 2013. Why Do People In Business Resist Change . Project Laneway . Retrieved 8 February 2015 .  Editorial Team, Mind Tools 18 February 2016. Kotters 8-Step Change Model . Mind Tools . Retrieved 18 February 2016 .  Archived copy . Archived from the original on 2017-05-01 . Retrieved 2016-03-25 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help  CS1 maint archived copy as title  link   Apress  What is Organizational Change  CTQ Consulting, LLC . ctqllc.com . Retrieved 2018-04-23 .  a b Duffy, Julius. Organizational Management PDF . Google Books .  Of Newton and Ostriches or what Ive learned from a change management project . Salo Impera-Strategy consulting-business strategy-Malaysia-Singapore . Retrieved 2016-07-13 .  Hiatt, J. M. 2006, ADKAR a model for change in Business, Government and our Community , Prosci Learning Center  Creasey, T., ADKAR, Core to the People Side of Change , Prosci, accessed 27 August 2019  Bennett, John L. Bush, Mary Wayne 2013. Coaching for Change . Routledge. p.  172. ISBN   9781136496011 .  Hiatt, J., The Essence of ADKAR a model for individual change management , Prosci 2006 Authority control GND  7606306-9 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleChange_management oldid913196620  Categories  Change management Stage theories Hidden categories CS1 errors deprecated parameters CS1 maint archived copy as title All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2018 Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers