Glossary From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia    Redirected from Glossaries  Jump to navigation Jump to search Alphabetical list of terms relevant to a certain field of study or action For Wikipedias glossary, see HelpGlossary . See also List of glossaries and Dictionary A Glossary of Islamic Legal Terminology A glossary , also known as a vocabulary or clavis , is an alphabetical list of terms in a particular domain of knowledge with the definitions for those terms. Traditionally, a glossary appears at the end of a book and includes terms within that book that are either newly introduced, uncommon, or specialized. While glossaries are most commonly associated with non-fiction books, in some cases, fiction novels may come with a glossary for unfamiliar terms. A bilingual glossary is a list of terms in one language defined in a second language or glossed by synonyms or at least near-synonyms in another language. In a general sense, a glossary contains explanations of concepts relevant to a certain field of study or action. In this sense, the term is related to the notion of ontology . Automatic methods have been also provided that transform a glossary into an ontology 1  or a computational lexicon. 2  Core glossary  edit  The Intelligence Law glossary provides a description of the key terms in intelligence law. A core glossary is a simple glossary or defining dictionary that enables definition of other concepts, especially for newcomers to a language or field of study. It contains a small working vocabulary and definitions for important or frequently encountered concepts, usually including idioms or metaphors useful in a culture. Automatic extraction of glossaries  edit  Computational approaches to the automated extraction of glossaries from corpora 3  or the Web 4  5  have been developed in the recent years. These methods typically start from domain terminology and extract one or more glosses for each term of interest. Glosses can then be analyzed to extract hypernyms of the defined term and other lexical and semantic relations. See also  edit  Wikipedia glossaries Index publishing Terminology extraction Frahang-i Pahlavig , a glossary of Pahlavi logograms References  edit   R. Navigli, P. Velardi. From Glossaries to Ontologies Extracting Semantic Structure from Textual Definitions , Ontology Learning and Population Bridging the Gap between Text and Knowledge P. Buitelaar and P. Cimiano, Eds., Series information for Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Applications, IOS Press, 2008, pp. 71-87.  R. Navigli. Using Cycles and Quasi-Cycles to Disambiguate Dictionary Glosses , Proc. of 12th Conference of the European Association for Computational Linguistics EACL 2009, Athens, Greece, March 30-April 3rd, 2009, pp. 594-602.  J. Klavans and S. Muresan. Evaluation of the Definder System for Fully Automatic Glossary Construction . In Proc. of American Medical Informatics Association Symp. , 2001, pp. 324328.  A. Fujii, T. Ishikawa. Utilizing the World Wide Web as an Encyclopedia Extracting Term Descriptions from Semi-Structured Texts . In Proc. 38th Ann. Meeting Assoc. for Computational Linguistics , 2000, pp. 488495.  P. Velardi, R. Navigli, P. DAmadio. Mining the Web to Create Specialized Glossaries , IEEE Intelligent Systems, 235, IEEE Press, 2008, pp. 18-25. External links  edit  Look up glossary in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. maxprograms.com Introduction to GlossML This article presents Glossary Markup Language GlossML, an open XML vocabulary specially designed to facilitate the exchange of glossaries. glossarist.com The Glossarist - Large list of glossaries www.ontopia.net The TAO of Topic Maps www.babel-linguistics.com Babel Linguistics Glossaries Selected Multilingual Glossaries by Industry www.maxprograms.com Anchovy Anchovy is a free multilingual cross-platform glossary editor and term extraction tool based on the open Glossary Markup Language GlossML format. v t e Lexicography Types of reference works Dictionary Glossary Lexicon Phrase book Thesaurus Types of dictionaries Advanced learners Anagram Bilingual Biographical Conceptual Crossword Defining Electronic Encyclopedic Etymological Explanatory Historical Idiom Language-for-specific-purposes Machine-readable Medical Monolingual learners Multi-field Picture Reverse Rhyming Rime Single-field Specialized Spelling dictionary Sub-field Visual Other List of lexicographers List of online dictionaries Linguistics portal Authority control GND  4157654-8 NARA  10634146 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleGlossary oldid914041447  Categories  Glossaries Book design Lexicography Hidden categories Articles with short description Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with NARA identifiers