Open-source software From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This is the latest accepted revision , reviewed on 3 September 2019 . Jump to navigation Jump to search Open-source software shares similarities with free software and is part of the broader term free and open-source software software licensed to ensure source code usage rights For broader coverage of this topic, see Open-source software movement . A screenshot of Linux Mint running the Xfce desktop environment , Mozilla Firefox browsing Wikipedia powered by MediaWiki , a calculator program, the built in calendar, Vim , GIMP , and the VLC media player , all of which are open-source software. Open-source software  OSS  is a type of computer software in which source code is released under a license in which the copyright holder grants users the rights to study, change, and distribute the software to anyone and for any purpose. 1  Open-source software may be developed in a collaborative public manner . Open-source software is a prominent example of open collaboration . 2  Open-source software development can bring in diverse perspectives beyond those of a single company. A 2008 report by the Standish Group stated that adoption of open-source software models have resulted in savings of about 60  billion 48 billion per year for consumers. 3  4  Contents 1 History 1.1 End of 1990s Foundation of the Open Source Initiative 2 Definitions 2.1 Open-source software licensing 2.2 Certifications 3 Open-source software development 3.1 Development model 3.2 Advantages and disadvantages 3.3 Development tools 3.4 Organizations 3.5 Funding 4 Comparisons with other software licensingdevelopment models 4.1 Closed source  proprietary software 4.2 Free software 4.3 Open-source versus source-available 4.4 Open-sourcing 5 Current applications and adoption 5.1 Widely used open-source software 6 Extensions for non-software use 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links History  edit  Further information History of free and open-source software End of 1990s Foundation of the Open Source Initiative  edit  In the early days of computing, programmers and developers shared software in order to learn from each other and evolve the field of computing. Eventually, the open-source notion moved to the way side of commercialization of software in the years 19701980. However, academics still often developed software collaboratively. For example, Donald Knuth in 1979 with the TeX typesetting system 5  or Richard Stallman in 1983 with the GNU operating system. 6  In 1997, Eric Raymond published The Cathedral and the Bazaar , a reflective analysis of the hacker community and free-software principles. The paper received significant attention in early 1998, and was one factor in motivating Netscape Communications Corporation to release their popular Netscape Communicator Internet suite as free software . This source code subsequently became the basis behind SeaMonkey , Mozilla Firefox , Thunderbird and KompoZer . Netscapes act prompted Raymond and others to look into how to bring the Free Software Foundation s free software ideas and perceived benefits to the commercial software industry. They concluded that FSFs social activism was not appealing to companies like Netscape, and looked for a way to rebrand the free software movement to emphasize the business potential of sharing and collaborating on software source code. 7  The new term they chose was open source, which was soon adopted by Bruce Perens , publisher Tim OReilly , Linus Torvalds , and others. The Open Source Initiative was founded in February 1998 to encourage use of the new term and evangelize open-source principles. 8  While the Open Source Initiative sought to encourage the use of the new term and evangelize the principles it adhered to, commercial software vendors found themselves increasingly threatened by the concept of freely distributed software and universal access to an applications source code . A Microsoft executive publicly stated in 2001 that open source is an intellectual property destroyer. I cant imagine something that could be worse than this for the software business and the intellectual-property business. 9  However, while Free and open-source software has historically played a role outside of the mainstream of private software development, companies as large as Microsoft have begun to develop official open-source presences on the Internet. IBM, Oracle, Google and State Farm are just a few of the companies with a serious public stake in todays competitive open-source market. There has been a significant shift in the corporate philosophy concerning the development of FOSS . 10  The free-software movement was launched in 1983. In 1998, a group of individuals advocated that the term free software should be replaced by open-source software OSS as an expression which is less ambiguous 11  12  13  and more comfortable for the corporate world. 14  Software developers may want to publish their software with an open-source license , so that anybody may also develop the same software or understand its internal functioning. With open-source software, generally anyone is allowed to create modifications of it, port it to new operating systems and instruction set architectures , share it with others or, in some cases, market it. Scholars Casson and Ryan have pointed out several policy-based reasons for adoption of open source  in particular, the heightened value proposition from open source when compared to most proprietary formats in the following categories Security Affordability Transparency Perpetuity Interoperability Flexibility Localization  particularly in the context of local governments who make software decisions. Casson and Ryan argue that governments have an inherent responsibility and fiduciary duty to taxpayers which includes the careful analysis of these factors when deciding to purchase proprietary software or implement an open-source option. 15  The Open Source Definition presents an open-source philosophy and further defines the terms of use, modification and redistribution of open-source software. Software licenses grant rights to users which would otherwise be reserved by copyright law to the copyright holder. Several open-source software licenses have qualified within the boundaries of the Open Source Definition . The most prominent and popular example is the GNU General Public License GPL, which allows free distribution under the condition that further developments and applications are put under the same licence, thus also free. 16  The open source label came out of a strategy session held on April 7, 1998 in Palo Alto in reaction to Netscapes January 1998 announcement of a source code release for Navigator as Mozilla . A group of individuals at the session included Tim OReilly , Linus Torvalds , Tom Paquin, Jamie Zawinski , Larry Wall , Brian Behlendorf , Sameer Parekh , Eric Allman , Greg Olson, Paul Vixie , John Ousterhout , Guido van Rossum , Philip Zimmermann , John Gilmore and Eric S. Raymond . 17  They used the opportunity before the release of Navigators source code to clarify a potential confusion caused by the ambiguity of the word free in English . Many people claimed that the birth of the Internet , since 1969, started the open-source movement, while others do not distinguish between open-source and free software movements. 18  The Free Software Foundation FSF, started in 1985, intended the word free to mean freedom to distribute or free as in free speech and not freedom from cost or free as in free beer. Since a great deal of free software already was and still is free of charge, such free software became associated with zero cost, which seemed anti-commercial. 7  The Open Source Initiative OSI was formed in February 1998 by Eric Raymond and Bruce Perens. With at least 20 years of evidence from case histories of closed software development versus open development already provided by the Internet developer community, the OSI presented the open source case to commercial businesses, like Netscape. The OSI hoped that the use of the label open source, a term suggested by Christine Peterson 6  19  of the Foresight Institute at the strategy session, would eliminate ambiguity, particularly for individuals who perceive free software as anti-commercial. They sought to bring a higher profile to the practical benefits of freely available source code, and they wanted to bring major software businesses and other high-tech industries into open source. Perens attempted to register open source as a service mark for the OSI, but that attempt was impractical by trademark standards. Meanwhile, due to the presentation of Raymonds paper to the upper management at NetscapeRaymond only discovered when he read the press release , 20  and was called by Netscape CEO Jim Barksdale s PA later in the dayNetscape released its Navigator source code as open source, with favorable results. 21  Definitions  edit  The logo of the Open Source Initiative The Open Source Initiative s OSI definition is recognized by several governments internationally 22  as the standard or de facto definition. In addition, many of the worlds largest open-source-software projects and contributors, including Debian, Drupal Association, FreeBSD Foundation, Linux Foundation, OpenSUSE Foundation, Mozilla Foundation, Wikimedia Foundation, Wordpress Foundation have committed 23  to upholding the OSIs mission and Open Source Definition through the OSI Affiliate Agreement. 24  OSI uses The Open Source Definition to determine whether it considers a software license open source. The definition was based on the Debian Free Software Guidelines , written and adapted primarily by Perens. 25  26  27  Perens did not base his writing on the four freedoms from the Free Software Foundation FSF, which were only widely available later. 28  Under Perens definition, open source is a broad software license that makes source code available to the general public with relaxed or non-existent restrictions on the use and modification of the code. It is an explicit feature of open source that it puts very few restrictions on the use or distribution by any organization or user, in order to enable the rapid evolution of the software. 29  Despite initially accepting it, 30  Richard Stallman of the FSF now flatly opposes the term Open Source being applied to what they refer to as free software. Although he agrees that the two terms describe almost the same category of software, Stallman considers equating the terms incorrect and misleading. 31  Stallman also opposes the professed pragmatism of the Open Source Initiative , as he fears that the free software ideals of freedom and community are threatened by compromising on the FSFs idealistic standards for software freedom. 32  The FSF considers free software to be a subset of open-source software, and Richard Stallman explained that DRM software, for example, can be developed as open source, despite that it does not give its users freedom it restricts them, and thus doesnt qualify as free software. 33  Open-source software licensing  edit  Main article Open-source license Further information Free software license See also Free and open-source software   Licensing , and Software license When an author contributes code to an open-source project e.g., Apache.org they do so under an explicit license e.g., the Apache Contributor License Agreement or an implicit license e.g. the open-source license under which the project is already licensing code. Some open-source projects do not take contributed code under a license, but actually require joint assignment of the authors copyright in order to accept code contributions into the project. 34  Examples of free software license  open-source licenses include Apache License , BSD license , GNU General Public License , GNU Lesser General Public License , MIT License , Eclipse Public License and Mozilla Public License . The proliferation of open-source licenses is a negative aspect of the open-source movement because it is often difficult to understand the legal implications of the differences between licenses. With more than 180,000 open-source projects available and more than 1400 unique licenses, the complexity of deciding how to manage open-source use within closed-source commercial enterprises has dramatically increased. Some are home-grown, while others are modeled after mainstream FOSS licenses such as Berkeley Software Distribution BSD, Apache, MIT-style Massachusetts Institute of Technology, or GNU General Public License GPL. In view of this, open-source practitioners are starting to use classification schemes in which FOSS licenses are grouped typically based on the existence and obligations imposed by the copyleft provision the strength of the copyleft provision. 35  An important legal milestone for the open source  free software movement was passed in 2008, when the US federal appeals court ruled that free software licenses definitely do set legally binding conditions on the use of copyrighted work, and they are therefore enforceable under existing copyright law. As a result, if end-users violate the licensing conditions, their license disappears, meaning they are infringing copyright. 36  Despite this licensing risk, most commercial software vendors are using open source software in commercial products while fulfilling the license terms, e.g. leveraging the Apache license. 37  Certifications  edit  Certification can help to build user confidence. Certification could be applied to the simplest component, to a whole software system. The United Nations University International Institute for Software Technology , 38  initiated a project known as The Global Desktop Project. This project aims to build a desktop interface that every end-user is able to understand and interact with, thus crossing the language and cultural barriers. The project would improve developing nations access to information systems. UNUIIST hopes to achieve this without any compromise in the quality of the software by introducing certifications. 39  Open-source software development  edit  Main article Open-source software development model Development model  edit  In his 1997 essay The Cathedral and the Bazaar , 40  open-source evangelist Eric S. Raymond suggests a model for developing OSS known as the bazaar model. Raymond likens the development of software by traditional methodologies to building a cathedral, carefully crafted by individual wizards or small bands of mages working in splendid isolation. 40  He suggests that all software should be developed using the bazaar style, which he described as a great babbling bazaar of differing agendas and approaches. 40  In the traditional model of development, which he called the cathedral model, development takes place in a centralized way. Roles are clearly defined. Roles include people dedicated to designing the architects, people responsible for managing the project, and people responsible for implementation. Traditional software engineering follows the cathedral model. The bazaar model, however, is different. In this model, roles are not clearly defined. Gregorio Robles 41  suggests that software developed using the bazaar model should exhibit the following patterns Users should be treated as co-developers The users are treated like co-developers and so they should have access to the source code of the software. Furthermore, users are encouraged to submit additions to the software, code fixes for the software, bug reports , documentation etc. Having more co-developers increases the rate at which the software evolves. Linuss law states, Given enough eyeballs all bugs are shallow. This means that if many users view the source code, they will eventually find all bugs and suggest how to fix them. Note that some users have advanced programming skills, and furthermore, each users machine provides an additional testing environment. This new testing environment offers that ability to find and fix a new bug. Early releases The first version of the software should be released as early as possible so as to increase ones chances of finding co-developers early. Frequent integration Code changes should be integrated merged into a shared code base as often as possible so as to avoid the overhead of fixing a large number of bugs at the end of the project life cycle. Some open source projects have nightly builds where integration is done automatically on a daily basis. Several versions There should be at least two versions of the software. There should be a buggier version with more features and a more stable version with fewer features. The buggy version also called the development version is for users who want the immediate use of the latest features, and are willing to accept the risk of using code that is not yet thoroughly tested. The users can then act as co-developers, reporting bugs and providing bug fixes. High modularization The general structure of the software should be modular allowing for parallel development on independent components. Dynamic decision-making structure There is a need for a decision-making structure, whether formal or informal, that makes strategic decisions depending on changing user requirements and other factors. Compare with extreme programming . Data suggests, however, that OSS is not quite as democratic as the bazaar model suggests. An analysis of five billion bytes of freeopen source code by 31,999 developers shows that 74 of the code was written by the most active 10 of authors. The average number of authors involved in a project was 5.1, with the median at 2. 42  Advantages and disadvantages  edit  Open source software is usually easier to obtain than proprietary software, often resulting in increased use. Additionally, the availability of an open source implementation of a standard can increase adoption of that standard. 43  It has also helped to build developer loyalty as developers feel empowered and have a sense of ownership of the end product. 44  Moreover, lower costs of marketing and logistical services are needed for OSS. It is a good tool to promote a companys image, including its commercial products. 45  The OSS development approach has helped produce reliable, high quality software quickly and inexpensively. 46  Open source development offers the potential for a more flexible technology and quicker innovation. It is said to be more reliable since it typically has thousands of independent programmers testing and fixing bugs of the software. Open source is not dependent on the company or author that originally created it. Even if the company fails, the code continues to exist and be developed by its users. Also, it uses open standards accessible to everyone thus, it does not have the problem of incompatible formats that may exist in proprietary software. It is flexible because modular systems allow programmers to build custom interfaces, or add new abilities to it and it is innovative since open source programs are the product of collaboration among a large number of different programmers. The mix of divergent perspectives, corporate objectives, and personal goals speeds up innovation. 47  Moreover, free software can be developed in accord with purely technical requirements. It does not require thinking about commercial pressure that often degrades the quality of the software. Commercial pressures make traditional software developers pay more attention to customers requirements than to security requirements, since such features are somewhat invisible to the customer. 48  It is sometimes said that the open source development process may not be well defined and the stages in the development process, such as system testing and documentation may be ignored. However this is only true for small mostly single programmer projects. Larger, successful projects do define and enforce at least some rules as they need them to make the teamwork possible. 49  50  In the most complex projects these rules may be as strict as reviewing even minor change by two independent developers. 51  Not all OSS initiatives have been successful, for example SourceXchange and Eazel . 44  Software experts and researchers who are not convinced by open sources ability to produce quality systems identify the unclear process, the late defect discovery and the lack of any empirical evidence as the most important problems collected data concerning productivity and quality. 52  It is also difficult to design a commercially sound business model around the open source paradigm. Consequently, only technical requirements may be satisfied and not the ones of the market. 52  In terms of security, open source may allow hackers to know about the weaknesses or loopholes of the software more easily than closed-source software. It depends on control mechanisms in order to create effective performance of autonomous agents who participate in virtual organizations. 53  Development tools  edit  In OSS development, tools are used to support the development of the product and the development process itself. 54  Revision control systems such as Concurrent Versions System CVS and later Subversion SVN and Git are examples of tools, often themselves open source, help manage the source code files and the changes to those files for a software project. 55  The projects are frequently hosted and published on source-code-hosting facilities such as Launchpad . 56  Open source projects are often loosely organized with little formalised process modelling or support, but utilities such as issue trackers are often used to organize open source software development. 54  Commonly used bugtrackers include Bugzilla and Redmine . 57  Tools such as mailing lists and IRC provide means of coordination among developers. 54  Centralized code hosting sites also have social features that allow developers to communicate. 56  Organizations  edit  Some of the more prominent organizations involved in OSS development include the Apache Software Foundation , creators of the Apache web server the Linux Foundation , a nonprofit which as of 2012 update  employed Linus Torvalds, the creator of the Linux operating system kernel  the Eclipse Foundation , home of the Eclipse software development platform the Debian Project, creators of the influential Debian GNULinux distribution the Mozilla Foundation , home of the Firefox web browser and OW2 , European-born community developing open source middleware. New organizations tend to have a more sophisticated governance model and their membership is often formed by legal entity members. 58  Open Source Software Institute is a membership-based, non-profit 501 c6 organization established in 2001 that promotes the development and implementation of open source software solutions within US Federal, state and local government agencies. OSSIs efforts have focused on promoting adoption of open source software programs and policies within Federal Government and Defense and Homeland Security communities. 59  Open Source for America is a group created to raise awareness in the United States Federal Government about the benefits of open source software. Their stated goals are to encourage the governments use of open source software, participation in open source software projects, and incorporation of open source community dynamics to increase government transparency. 60  Mil-OSS is a group dedicated to the advancement of OSS use and creation in the military. 61  Funding  edit  Main article Business models for open-source software Open-source software is widely used both as independent applications and as components in non-open-source applications. Customers may be willing to use open technology under standard commercial terms and thereby pay for open-source software when additional value is created. This can be the case for legal protection e.g., indemnification from copyright or patent infringement, commercial-grade QA, and professional supporttrainingconsulting that are typical of commercial software, while also receiving the benefits of fine-grained control and lack of lock-in that comes with open-source. Open-source software is used as components inside of proprietary, for-profit products and services by many independent software vendors ISVs, value-added resellers VARs, and hardware vendors  OEMs or ODMs  in frameworks , modules, and libraries . 62  Comparisons with other software licensingdevelopment models  edit  Closed source  proprietary software  edit  Main article Comparison of open-source and closed-source software The debate over open source vs. closed source alternatively called proprietary software  is sometimes heated. The top four reasons as provided by Open Source Business Conference survey 63   individuals or organizations choose open source software are lower cost security no vendor lock in better quality Since innovative companies no longer rely heavily on software sales, proprietary software has become less of a necessity. 64  As such, things like open source content management system or CMSdeployments are becoming more commonplace. In 2009, 65  the US White House switched its CMS system from a proprietary system to Drupal open source CMS. Further, companies like Novell who traditionally sold software the old-fashioned way continually debate the benefits of switching to open source availability, having already switched part of the product offering to open source code. 66  In this way, open source software provides solutions to unique or specific problems. As such, it is reported 67  that 98 of enterprise-level companies use open source software offerings in some capacity. With this market shift, more critical systems are beginning to rely on open source offerings, 68  allowing greater funding such as US Department of Homeland Security grants 68   to help hunt for security bugs. According to a pilot study of organizations adopting or not adopting OSS, the following factors of statistical significance were observed in the managers beliefs a attitudes toward outcomes, b the influences and behaviors of others, and c their ability to act. 69  Proprietary source distributors have started to develop and contribute to the open source community due to the market share shift, doing so by the need to reinvent their models in order to remain competitive. 70  Many advocates argue that open source software is inherently safer because any person can view, edit, and change code. 71  A study of the Linux source code has 0.17 bugs per 1000 lines of code while proprietary software generally scores 2030 bugs per 1000 lines. 72  Free software  edit  Main article Alternative terms for free software See also Comparison of free and open-source software licenses According to the Free software movement s leader, Richard Stallman , the main difference is that by choosing one term over the other i.e. either open source or  free software  one lets others know about what ones goals are Open source is a development methodology free software is a social movement. 32  Nevertheless, there is significant overlap between open source software and free software. 33  The FSF 73  said that the term open source fosters an ambiguity of a different kind such that it confuses the mere availability of the source with the freedom to use, modify, and redistribute it. On the other hand, the free software term was criticized for the ambiguity of the word free as available at no cost, which was seen as discouraging for business adoption, 74  and for the historical ambiguous usage of the term. 7  75  76  Developers have used the alternative terms Free and Open Source Software  FOSS , or FreeLibre and Open Source Software FLOSS, consequently, to describe open source software that is also free software . 77  While the definition of open source software is very similar to the FSFs free software definition 78  it was based on the Debian Free Software Guidelines , written and adapted primarily by Bruce Perens with input from Eric S. Raymond and others. 79  The term open source was originally intended to be trademarkable however, the term was deemed too descriptive, so no trademark exists. 80  The OSI would prefer that people treat open source as if it were a trademark, and use it only to describe software licensed under an OSI approved license. 81  OSI Certified is a trademark licensed only to people who are distributing software licensed under a license listed on the Open Source Initiatives list. 82  Open-source versus source-available  edit  Main article Source-available software Although the OSI definition of open source software is widely accepted, a small number of people and organizations use the term to refer to software where the source is available for viewing, but which may not legally be modified or redistributed. Such software is more often referred to as source-available , or as shared source , a term coined by Microsoft in 2001. 83  While in 2007 two of Microsofts Shared Source Initiative licenses were certified by the OSI , most licenses from the SSI program are still source-available only . 84  Open-sourcing  edit  Open-sourcing is the act of propagating the open source movement , most often referring to releasing previously proprietary software under an open source  free software license, 85  but it may also refer programming Open Source software or installing Open Source software. Notable software packages, previously proprietary, which have been open sourced include Netscape Navigator , the code of which became the basis of the Mozilla and Mozilla Firefox web browsers StarOffice , which became the base of the OpenOffice.org office suite and LibreOffice Global File System , was originally GPLd , then made proprietary in 2001, but in 2004 was re-GPLd. SAP DB , which has become MaxDB , and is now distributed and owned by MySQL AB InterBase database, which was open sourced by Borland in 2000 and presently exists as a commercial product and an open-source fork  Firebird  Before changing the license of software, distributors usually audit the source code for third party licensed code which they would have to remove or obtain permission for its relicense. Backdoors and other malware should also be removed as they may easily be discovered after release of the code. Current applications and adoption  edit  Main article Free and open-source software   Adoption See also Linux adoption and Free software   Adoption .mw-parser-output .quoteboxbackground-colorF9F9F9border1px solid aaabox-sizingborder-boxpadding10pxfont-size88max-width100.mw-parser-output .quotebox.floatleftmargin0.5em 1.4em 0.8em 0.mw-parser-output .quotebox.floatrightmargin0.5em 0 0.8em 1.4em.mw-parser-output .quotebox.centeredmargin0.5em auto 0.8em auto.mw-parser-output .quotebox.floatleft p,.mw-parser-output .quotebox.floatright pfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .quotebox-titlebackground-colorF9F9F9text-aligncenterfont-sizelargerfont-weightbold.mw-parser-output .quotebox-quote.quotedbeforefont-familyTimes New Roman,seriffont-weightboldfont-sizelargecolorgraycontent  vertical-align-45line-height0.mw-parser-output .quotebox-quote.quotedafterfont-famil yTimes New Roman,seriffont-weightboldfont-sizelargecolorgraycontent  line-height0.mw-parser-output .quotebox .left-alignedtext-alignleft.mw-parser-output .quotebox .right-alignedtext-alignright.mw-parser-output .quotebox .center-alignedtext-aligncenter.mw-parser-output .quotebox citedisplayblockfont-stylenormalmedia screen and max-width360px.mw-parser-output .quoteboxmin-width100margin0 0 0.8emimportantfloatnoneimportant We migrated key functions from Windows to Linux because we needed an operating system that was stable and reliable  one that would give us in-house control. So if we needed to patch, adjust, or adapt, we could. Official statement of the United Space Alliance , which manages the computer systems for the International Space Station ISS, regarding why they chose to switch from Windows to Debian GNULinux on the ISS 86  87  Widely used open-source software  edit  Main article List of free and open-source software packages Open source software projects are built and maintained by a network of volunteer programmers and are widely used in free as well as commercial products. 37  Prime examples of open-source products are the Apache HTTP Server , the e-commerce platform osCommerce , internet browsers Mozilla Firefox and Chromium the project where the vast majority of development of the freeware Google Chrome is done and the full office suite LibreOffice . One of the most successful open-source products is the GNULinux operating system, an open-source Unix-like operating system, and its derivative Android , an operating system for mobile devices. 88  89  In some industries, open source software is the norm. 90  Extensions for non-software use  edit  Main article Open source model See also Open content and Open collaboration While the term open source applied originally only to the source code of software, 91  it is now being applied to many other areas 92  such as Open source ecology , 93  a movement to decentralize technologies so that any human can use them. However, it is often misapplied to other areas which have different and competing principles, which overlap only partially. The same principles that underlie open source software can be found in many other ventures, such as open-source hardware , Wikipedia , and open-access publishing. Collectively, these principles are known as open source, open content , and open collaboration  94  any system of innovation or production that relies on goal-oriented yet loosely coordinated participants, who interact to create a product or service of economic value, which they make available to contributors and non-contributors alike. 2  This culture or ideology takes the view that the principles apply more generally to facilitate concurrent input of different agendas, approaches and priorities, in contrast with more centralized models of development such as those typically used in commercial companies. 95  See also  edit  Free and open-source software portal Comparison of free and open-source software licenses Free software Free software community Free software license Free software movement List of open source software packages Open-content Open source advocacy Open source hardware Open Source Initiative Open-source license Open Source Software Institute Open source software security Open source video games All articles with titles containing Open source Proprietary software Shared source Timeline of open source software References  edit   St. Laurent, Andrew M. 2008. Understanding Open Source and Free Software Licensing . OReilly Media. p.  4. ISBN   9780596553951 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  a b Levine, Sheen S. Prietula, Michael J. 30 December 2013. Open Collaboration for Innovation Principles and Performance. Organization Science . 25 5 14141433. arXiv  1406.7541 . doi  10.1287orsc.2013.0872 . ISSN   1047-7039 .  Rothwell, Richard 5 August 2008. Creating wealth with free software . Free Software Magazine . Archived from the original on 8 September 2008 . Retrieved 8 September 2008 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Standish Newsroom   Open Source Press release. Boston . 16 April 2008. Archived from the original on 18 January 2012 . Retrieved 8 September 2008 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Gaudeul, Alexia 2007. Do Open Source Developers Respond to Competition The LaTeX Case Study . Review of Network Economics . 6 2. doi  10.22021446-9022.1119 . ISSN   1446-9022 .  a b VM Brasseur 2018. Forge your Future with Open Source . Pragmatic Programmers. ISBN   978-1-68050-301-2 .  a b c Karl Fogel 2016. Producing Open Source Software  How to Run a Successful Free Software Project . OReilly Media . Retrieved 11 April 2016 . But the problem went deeper than that. The word free carried with it an inescapable moral connotation if freedom was an end in itself, it didnt matter whether free software also happened to be better, or more profitable for certain businesses in certain circumstances. Those were merely pleasant side effects of a motive that was, at its root, neither technical nor mercantile, but moral. Furthermore, the free as in freedom position forced a glaring inconsistency on corporations who wanted to support particular free programs in one aspect of their business, but continue marketing proprietary software in others.  History of the OSI . Opensource.org.  B. Charny 3 May 2001. Microsoft Raps Open-Source Approach . CNET News.  Jeffrey Voas, Keith W. Miller  Tom Costello. Free and Open Source Software. IT Professional 126 November 2010, pg. 1416.  Eric S. Raymond . Goodbye, free software hello, open source   . catb.org. The problem with it is twofold. First, ... the term free is very ambiguous ... Second, the term makes a lot of corporate types nervous.  Kelty, Christpher M. 2008. The Cultural Significance of free Software  Two Bits PDF . Duke University press  durham and london. p.  99. Prior to 1998, Free Software referred either to the Free Software Foundation and the watchful, micromanaging eye of Stallman or to one of thousands of different commercial, avocational, or university-research projects, processes, licenses, and ideologies that had a variety of names sourceware, freeware, shareware, open software, public domain software, and so on. The term Open Source, by contrast, sought to encompass them all in one movement.  Shea, Tom 23 June 1983. Free software  Free software is a junkyard of software spare parts . InfoWorld . Retrieved 10 February 2016 . In contrast to commercial software is a large and growing body of free software that exists in the public domain. Public-domain software is written by microcomputer hobbyists also known as hackers many of whom are professional programmers in their work life. ... Since everybody has access to source code, many routines have not only been used but dramatically improved by other programmers.  Raymond, Eric S. 8 February 1998. Goodbye, free software hello, open source   . Retrieved 13 August 2008 . After the Netscape announcement broke in January I did a lot of thinking about the next phase  the serious push to get free software accepted in the mainstream corporate world. And I realized we have a serious problem with free software itself. Specifically, we have a problem with the term free software, itself, not the concept. Ive become convinced that the term has to go.  Open Standards, Open Source Adoption in the Public Sector, and Their Relationship to Microsofts Market Dominance by Tony Casson, Patrick S. Ryan   SSRN. Papers.ssrn.com. SSRN   1656616 . Missing or empty url  help   Holtgrewe, Ursula 2004. Articulating the Speeds of the Internet The Case of Open SourceFree Software . Time  Society Submitted manuscript. 13  129146. doi  10.11770961463X04040750 .  Open Source Pioneers Meet in Historic Summit . 14 April 1998 . Retrieved 20 September 2014 .  Muffatto, Moreno 2006. Open Source A Multidisciplinary Approach . Imperial College Press. ISBN   978-1-86094-665-3 .  httpsopensource.comarticle182coining-term-open-source-software  NETSCAPE ANNOUNCES PLANS TO MAKE NEXT-GENERATION COMMUNICATOR SOURCE CODE AVAILABLE FREE ON THE NET . Netscape Communications Corporation . 22 January 1998. Archived from the original on 1 April 2007 . Retrieved 8 August 2013 . BOLD MOVE TO HARNESS CREATIVE POWER OF THOUSANDS OF INTERNET DEVELOPERS COMPANY MAKES NETSCAPE NAVIGATOR AND COMMUNICATOR 4.0 IMMEDIATELY FREE FOR ALL USERS, SEEDING MARKET FOR ENTERPRISE AND NETCENTER BUSINESSES  MOUNTAIN VIEW, Calif., April 1 PRNewswire -- Netscape Communications and open source developers are celebrating the first anniversary, March 31, 1999, of the release of Netscapes browser source code to mozilla.org . Netscape Communications . 31 March 1999 . Retrieved 10 January 2013 . ...The organization that manages open source developers working on the next generation of Netscapes browser and communication software. This event marked a historical milestone for the Internet as Netscape became the first major commercial software company to open its source code, a trend that has since been followed by several other corporations. Since the code was first published on the Internet, thousands of individuals and organizations have downloaded it and made hundreds of contributions to the software. Mozilla.org is now celebrating this one-year anniversary with a party Thursday night in San Francisco.  International Authority  Recognition . Opensource.org.  List of OSI Affiliates . Opensource.org.  OSI Affiliate Agreement . Opensource.org.  Perens, Bruce. Open Sources Voices from the Open Source Revolution . OReilly Media . 1999.  Dibona, Chris Ockman, Sam January 1999. The Open Source Definition by Bruce Perens . ISBN   978-1-56592-582-3 .  The Open Source Definition . , The Open Source Definition according to the Open Source Initiative  How Many Open Source Licenses Do You Need  Slashdot . News.slashdot.org . 16 February 2009 . Retrieved 25 March 2012 .  Open Source Initiative. The Open Source Definition Annotated . opensource.org . Retrieved 22 July 2016 .  Tiemann, Michael. History of the OSI . Open Source Initiative. Archived from the original on 24 September 2006 . Retrieved 13 May 2014 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Stallman, Richard 16 June 2007. Why Open Source misses the point of Free Software . Philosophy of the GNU Project . Free Software Foundation . Retrieved 23 July 2007 . As the advocates of open source draw new users into our community, we free software activists have to work even more to bring the issue of freedom to those new users attention. We have to say, Its free software and it gives you freedommore and louder than ever. Every time you say free software rather than open source, you help our campaign.  a b Stallman, Richard 19 June 2007. Why Free Software is better than Open Source   . Philosophy of the GNU Project . Free Software Foundation . Retrieved 23 July 2007 . Sooner or later these users will be invited to switch back to proprietary software for some practical advantage Countless companies seek to offer such temptation, and why would users decline Only if they have learned to value the freedom free software gives them, for its own sake. It is up to us to spread this ideaand in order to do that, we have to talk about freedom. A certain amount of the keep quiet approach to business can be useful for the community, but we must have plenty of freedom talk too.  a b Stallman, Richard 16 June 2007. Why Open Source misses the point of Free Software . Philosophy of the GNU Project . Free Software Foundation . Retrieved 23 July 2007 . Under the pressure of the movie and record companies, software for individuals to use is increasingly designed specifically to restrict them. This malicious feature is known as DRM or Digital Restrictions Management see DefectiveByDesign.org , and it is the antithesis in spirit of the freedom that free software aims to provide. ... Yet some open source supporters have proposed open source DRM software. Their idea is that by publishing the source code of programs designed to restrict your access to encrypted media, and allowing others to change it, they will produce more powerful and reliable software for restricting users like you. Then it will be delivered to you in devices that do not allow you to change it. This software might be open source, and use the open source development model but it wont be free software since it wont respect the freedom of the users that actually run it. If the open source development model succeeds in making this software more powerful and reliable for restricting you , that will make it even worse.  Rosen, Lawrence. Joint Works  Open Source Licensing Software Freedom and Intellectual Property Law . flylib.com . Retrieved 22 July 2016 .  Andrew T. Pham, Verint Systems Inc., and Matthew B. Weinstein and Jamie L. Ryerson.  Easy as ABC Categorizing Open Source Licenses  www.IPO.org. June 2010.  Shiels, Maggie 14 August 2008. Legal milestone for open source . BBC News . Retrieved 15 August 2008 .  a b Popp, Dr. Karl Michael 2015. Best Practices for commercial use of open source software . Norderstedt, Germany Books on Demand. ISBN   978-3738619096 .  1 Archived 15 November 2007 at the Wayback Machine  2 Archived 7 December 2007 at the Wayback Machine  a b c Raymond, Eric S. 11 September 2000. The Cathedral and the Bazaar . Retrieved 19 September 2004 .  Robles, Gregorio 2004. A Software Engineering Approach to Libre Software PDF . In Robert A. Gehring, Bernd Lutterbeck ed.. Open Source Jahrbuch 2004 PDF . Berlin Technical University of Berlin . Retrieved 20 April 2005 .  Ghosh, R.A. Robles, G. Glott, R. 2002. FreeLibre and Open Source Software Survey and Study Part V. Maastricht International Institute of Infonomics .  US Department of Defense. Open Source Software FAQ . Chief Information Officer . Retrieved 22 July 2016 .  a b Sharma, Srinarayan Vijayan Sugumaran Balaji Rajagopalan 2002. A framework for creating hybrid-open source software communities PDF . Info Systems Journal . 12  725. doi  10.1046j.1365-2575.2002.00116.x .  Landry, John Rajiv Gupta September 2000. Profiting from Open Source. Harvard Business Review . doi  10.1225F00503 .  Reynolds, Carl Jeremy Wyatt February 2011. Open Source, Open Standards, and Health Care Information Systems . Journal of Medical Internet Research . 13 1 e24. doi  10.2196jmir.1521 . PMC   3221346 . PMID   21447469 . Retrieved 17 March 2011 .  Plotkin, Hal December 1998. What and Why you should know about open-source software. Harvard Management Update  89.  Payne, Christian February 2002. On the Security of Open Source Software. Info Systems Journal . 12 1 6178. doi  10.1046j.1365-2575.2002.00118.x .  GNU Classpath Hackers Guide GNU Classpath Hackers Guide . Gnu.org . 11 August 2003 . Retrieved 25 March 2012 .  Meffert, Klaus Neil Rotstan 2007. Brief summary of coding style and practice used in JGAP . Java Genetic Algorithms Package. Archived from the original on 25 December 2012 . Retrieved 8 September 2008 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   Tripp, Andy 16 July 2007. Classpath hackers frustrated with slow OpenJDK process . Javalobby.  a b Stamelos, Ioannis Lefteris Angelis Apostolos Oikonomou Georgios L. Bleris 2002. Code Quality Analysis in Open Source Software Development. Info System Journal . 12  4360. doi  10.1109MS.2007.2 .  Gallivan, Michael J. 2001. Striking a Balance Between Trust and Control in a Virtual Organization A Content Analysis of Open Source Software Case Studies. Info Systems Journal . 11 4 277304. doi  10.1046j.1365-2575.2001.00108.x .  a b c Boldyreff, Cornelia Lavery, Janet Nutter, David Rank, Stephen. Open Source Development Processes and Tools PDF . Flosshub . Retrieved 22 July 2016 .  Stansberry, Glen 18 September 2008. 7 Version Control Systems Reviewed  Smashing Magazine . Smashing Magazine . Retrieved 22 July 2016 .  a b Frantzell, Lennart. GitHub, Launchpad and BitBucket, how todays distributed version control systems are fueling the unprecendented global open source revolution . IBM developerworks . Retrieved 22 July 2016 .  Baker, Jason. Top 4 open source issue tracking tools . opensource.com . Retrieved 22 July 2016 .  Franois Letellier 2008, Open Source Software the Role of Nonprofits in Federating Business and Innovation Ecosystems , AFME 2008.  Open Source Software Institute. Home . Open Source Software Institute . Retrieved 22 July 2016 .  Hellekson, Gunnar. Home . Open Source for America . Retrieved 25 March 2012 .  from EntandoSrl Entando . Mil-OSS . Retrieved 25 March 2012 .  Popp, Dr. Karl Michael Meyer, Ralf 2010. Profit from Software Ecosystems Business Models, Ecosystems and Partnerships in the Software Industry . Norderstedt, Germany Books on Demand. ISBN   9783839169834 .  Irina Guseva irina_guseva 26 March 2009. Bad Economy Is Good for Open Source . Cmswire.com . Retrieved 25 March 2012 .  Open Source vs. Proprietary Software . PCWorld Business Center . Pcworld.com. 3 November 2011 . Retrieved 25 March 2012 .  Geoff Spick Goffee71 26 October 2009. Open Source Movement Finds Friends at the White House . Cmswire.com . Retrieved 25 March 2012 .  Pandoras box for open source  CNET News . News.cnet.com . 12 February 2004 . Retrieved 25 March 2012 .  Murphy, David 15 August 2010. Survey 98 Percent of Companies Use Open-Source, 29 Percent Contribute Back . News  Opinion . PCMag.com . Retrieved 25 March 2012 .  a b Homeland Security helps secure open-source code  CNET News . News.cnet.com . Retrieved 25 March 2012 .  Greenley, Neil. Open Source Software Survey . Archived from the original on 22 June 2013 . Retrieved 9 October 2012 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   Boulanger, A. 2005. Open-source versus proprietary software Is one more reliable and secure than the other IBM Systems Journal, 442, 239248.  Seltzer, Larry 4 May 2004. Is Open-Source Really Safer . PCMag.com . Retrieved 25 March 2012 .  Michelle Delio. Linux Fewer Bugs Than Rivals . Wired.com . Retrieved 23 May 2016 .  Why Open Source Misses the Point of Free Software  GNU Project  Free Software Foundation . Gnu.org . Retrieved 30 March 2015 .  Goodbye, free software hello, open source   . The problem with it is twofold. First, ... the term free is very ambiguous ... Second, the term makes a lot of corporate types nervous.  Kelty, Christpher M. 2008. The Cultural Significance of free Software  Two Bits PDF . Duke University press  Durham and London. p.  99. Prior to 1998, Free Software referred either to the Free Software Foundation and the watchful, micromanaging eye of Stallman or to one of thousands of different commercial, avocational, or university-research projects, processes, licenses, and ideologies that had a variety of names sourceware, freeware, shareware, open software, public domain software, and so on. The term Open Source, by contrast, sought to encompass them all in one movement.  OSI. History of OSI . conferees decided it was time to dump the moralizing and confrontational attitude that had been associated with free software in the past and sell the idea strictly on the same pragmatic, business-case grounds  Stallman, Richard. httpswww.gnu.orgphilosophyfloss-and-foss.en.html . FLOSS and FOSS . Free Software Foundation . Retrieved 22 July 2016 . External link in title  help   Stallman, Richard 16 June 2007. Why Open Source misses the point of Free Software . Philosophy of the GNU Project . GNU Project . Retrieved 23 July 2007 .  Tiemann, Michael 19 September 2006. History of the OSI . Open Source Initiative . Retrieved 23 August 2008 .  Nelson, Russell 26 March 2007. Certification Mark . Open Source Initiative . Archived from the original on 6 February 2008 . Retrieved 22 July 2007 .  Raymond, Eric S. 22 November 1998. OSI Launch Announcement . Open Source Initiative . Retrieved 22 July 2007 .  Nelson, Russell 19 September 2006. Open Source Licenses by Category . Open Source Initiative . Retrieved 22 July 2007 .  Microsoft announces expansion of Shared Source Initiative . Geekzone.co.nz. 21 March 2005 . Retrieved 30 March 2015 .  OSI Approves Microsoft License Submissions . opensource.org. 17 October 2007 . Retrieved 8 August 2013 . Acting on the advice of the License Approval Chair, the OSI Board today approved the Microsoft Public License Ms-PL and the Microsoft Reciprocal License Ms-RL. The decision to approve was informed by the overwhelming though not unanimous consensus from the open source community that these licenses satisfied the 10 criteria of the Open Source definition, and should, therefore, be approved.  Agerfalk, Par and Fitzgerald, Brian 2008, Outsourcing to an Unknown Workforce Exploring Opensourcing as a Global Sourcing Strategy, MIS Quarterly , Vol 32, No 2, pp.385410  Gunter, Joel 10 May 2013. International Space Station to boldly go with Linux over Windows . The Telegraph .  Bridgewater, Adrian 13 May 2013. International Space Station adopts Debian Linux, drops Windows  Red Hat into airlock . Computer Weekly .  Michael J. Gallivan, Striking a Balance Between Trust and Control in a Virtual Organization A Content Analysis of Open Source Software Case Studies, Info Systems Journal 11 2001 277304  Hal Plotkin, What and Why you should know about open source software Harvard Management Update 12 1998 89  Noyes, Katherine. Open Source Software Is Now a Norm in Businesses . PCWorld . Retrieved 22 July 2016 .  Stallman, Richard 24 September 2007. Why Open Source misses the point of Free Software . Philosophy of the GNU Project . Free Software Foundation . Retrieved 6 December 2007 . However, not all of the users and developers of free software agreed with the goals of the free software movement. In 1998, a part of the free software community splintered off and began campaigning in the name of open source. The term was originally proposed to avoid a possible misunderstanding of the term free software, but it soon became associated with philosophical views quite different from those of the free software movement.  What is open source . Retrieved 29 July 2013 .  Open Source Ecology . ...building the worlds first replicable open source self-sufficient decentralized high-appropriate-tech permaculture ecovillage...  Open Collaboration Bitcoin . Informs.org. 2 January 2014 . Retrieved 30 March 2015 .  Raymond, Eric S. The Cathedral and the Bazaar . ed 3.0. 2000. Further reading  edit  Androutsellis-Theotokis, Stephanos Spinellis, Diomidis  Kechagia, Maria Gousios, Georgios 2010. Open source software A survey from 10,000 feet PDF . Foundations and Trends in Technology, Information and Operations Management . 4 . pp.  187347. doi  10.15610200000026 . ISBN   978-1-60198-484-5 . Coleman, E. Gabriella . Coding Freedom The Ethics and Aesthetics of Hacking Princeton UP, 2012 Fadi P. Deek James A. M. McHugh 2008. Open Source Technology and Policy . Cambridge Cambridge University Press. ISBN   978-0-511-36775-5 . Chris DiBona and Sam Ockman and Mark Stone, ed. 1999. Open Sources Voices from the Open Source Revolution . OReilly. ISBN   978-1-56592-582-3 . Joshua Gay, ed. 2002. Free Software, Free Society Selected Essays of Richard M. Stallman . Boston GNU Press, Free Software Foundation. ISBN   978-1-882114-98-6 . Understanding FOSS  editor  Sampathkumar Coimbatore India Benkler, Yochai 2002, Coases Penguin, or, Linux and The Nature of the Firm. Yale Law Journal 112.3 Dec 2002 p36778 in Adobe pdf format v. Engelhardt, Sebastian 2008. The Economic Properties of Software, Jena Economic Research Papers, Volume 2 2008, Number 2008-045 PDF . Lerner, J.  Tirole, J. 2002 Some simple economics on open source, Journal of Industrial Economics 502, p 197234 Vlimki, Mikko 2005. The Rise of Open Source Licensing A Challenge to the Use of Intellectual Property in the Software Industry PDF . Turre Publishing. Archived from the original PDF on 4 March 2009. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  Polley, Barry 11 December 2007. Open Source Discussion Paper  version 1.0 PDF . New Zealand Ministry of Justice . Retrieved 12 December 2007 . Cite journal requires journal  help  Rossi, M. A. 2006 Decoding the freeopen source software puzzle A survey of theoretical and empirical contributions, in J. Bitzer P. Schrder, eds, The Economics of Open Source Software Development, p 1555. Open Sources Voices from the Open Source Revolution  an online book containing essays from prominent members of the open source community Whence The Source Untangling the Open SourceFree Software Debate , essay on the differences between free software and open source, by Thomas Scoville Berry, D M 2004. The Contestation of Code A Preliminary Investigation into the Discourse of the Free Software and Open Software Movement, Critical Discourse Studies, Volume 11. Schrape, Jan-Felix 2017. Open Source Projects as Incubators of Innovation. From Niche Phenomenon to Integral Part of the Software Industry PDF . Stuttgart Research Contributions to Organizational Sociology and Innovation Studies 2017-03. Sustainable Open Source , a Confluence article providing guidelines for fair participation in the open source ecosystem, by Radovan Semancik External links  edit  Wikimedia Commons has media related to Free software . Wikibooks has a book on the topic of Open Source Wikibooks has a book on the topic of Use the Source Scholia has a topic profile for Open-source software . The Open Source Initiative s definition of open source Free  Open Source Research Community  Many online research papers about Open Source Open-source software at Curlie v t e Software distribution Licenses Beerware Floating licensing Free and open-source Free Open source Freely redistributable Proprietary Public domain Source-available Compensation models Adware Commercial software Retail software Crippleware Crowdfunding Freemium Freeware Pay what you want Careware Donationware Open-core model Postcardware Shareware Nagware Delivery methods Digital distribution File sharing On-premises Pre-installed Product bundling Retail software Sneakernet Software as a service Deceptive andor illicit Unwanted software bundling Malware Spyware Trojan horse Worm Ransomware Scareware Shovelware Vaporware Software release life cycle Abandonware End-of-life Long-term support Software maintenance Software maintainer Software publisher Copy protection Digital rights management Software protection dongle Hardware restrictions License manager Product activation Product key Software copyright Software patent Torrent poisoning v t e Free and open-source software General Alternative terms for free software Comparison of open-source and closed-source software Comparison of source-code-hosting facilities Free software Free software project directories Gratis versus libre Long-term support Open-source software Open-source software development Outline Software packages Audio Bioinformatics Codecs Collaboration Configuration management Device drivers Graphics Wireless Geophysics Health Mathematics Operating systems Programming languages Routing Statistics Television Video games Web applications Content management systems E-commerce Word processors Android apps iOS apps Commercial Trademarked Formerly proprietary Community Free software movement History Open-source-software movement Organizations Events Licenses AFL Apache APSL Artistic Beerware Boost BSD CC0 CDDL EPL Free Software Foundation GNU GPL GNU LGPL ISC MIT MPL Ms-PL  RL Python Python Software Foundation License Sleepycat Unlicense WTFPL zlib Types and standards Comparison of free and open-source software licenses Contributor License Agreement Copyleft Debian Free Software Guidelines Definition of Free Cultural Works Free license The Free Software Definition The Open Source Definition Open-source license Permissive software license Public domain Viral license Challenges Digital rights management Firmware security Hardware restrictions License proliferation Mozilla software rebranding Proprietary device drivers Proprietary firmware Proprietary software SCOLinux controversies Secure boot Software patents Software security Trusted Computing Related topics Forking GNU Manifesto Microsoft Open Specification Promise Open-core model Open-source hardware Shared Source Initiative Source-available software The Cathedral and the Bazaar Revolution OS Free and open-source software portal Category Commons WikiProject Book v t e Intellectual property activism Issues Artificial scarcity Copyright infringement Digital rights management Gripe site Legal aspects of file sharing Mashup digital music videos Monopolies of knowledge Music piracy Orphan works Patents biological software software patent debate trolling Public domain Concepts All rights reversed Alternative compensation system Anti-copyright notice Business models for open-source software Copyleft Commercial use of copyleft works Commons-based peer production Electronic sell-through Free content Free software license Libertarian positions Open content Open-design movement Open Music Model Open patent Open-source Open-source hardware Open-source software Prize system contests Share-alike Video on demand Movements Access to Knowledge movement Anti-copyright Cultural environmentalism Free-culture movement Free software movement Organizations Pro-copyright Copyright Alliance Pro-copyleft Creative Commons Electronic Frontier Foundation Free Software Foundation Open Rights Group Organization for Transformative Works The Pirate Bay Piratbyrn Pirate Party Public Knowledge Sci-Hub Students for Free Culture People Cory Doctorow Alexandra Elbakyan Rick Falkvinge Lawrence Lessig Richard Stallman Peter Suber Peter Sunde Aaron Swartz Documentaries Steal This Film 2006, 2007 Good Copy Bad Copy 2007 RiP A Remix Manifesto 2008 TPB AFK The Pirate Bay Away From Keyboard 2013 The Internets Own Boy 2014 v t e Free-culture and open-source movements Concepts and practices Key concepts Commons-based peer production Crowdsourcing Gratis versus libre Open collaboration Openness Participatory culture Sharism Social peer-to-peer processes Peer-to-peer banking Peer-to-peer carsharing Peer-to-peer lending Peer-to-peer ridesharing Research and science Citizen science Open science Access Notebook science Research Science data Plan S Data, information, and knowledge Free content Knowledge commons Open communication Open knowledge Content Data Communication and learning Media Collaborative writing Democratic media Open publishing Participatory media Peer review Education Open education Educational resources University Admissions Open-door academic policy Journalism Citizen media Citizen journalism and Wiki journalism Open-source journalism Economy, production, and development Products Free and open-source software - FOSS FreeLibre software Open-source software Open-design movement Robotics Open gaming Open-source architecture Open-source hardware Economic principles Gift economy Open innovation Open patent Open standard Sharing economy Politics and governance Open government Open-source governance Organizations Creative Commons Free Software Foundation Open Architecture Network Openmod initiative Open Knowledge International Open Rights Group Open Source Initiative Open Web Foundation P2P Foundation Pirate Party PLOS SPARC Activists Tim Berners-Lee Alexandra Elbakyan Cody Wilson Lawrence Lessig Peter Murray-Rust Douglas Rushkoff Richard Stallman Peter Suber Peter Sunde Aaron Swartz Matthew H. Todd John Wilbanks Projects and movements DIYbio Free-culture movement Free software movement Open science movement Open Source Ecology Open-source software movement OpenCores OpenWetWare Sci-Hub Tools Licenses Creative Commons GPL Definition Docs Free Cultural Works Free Software Open Open Source Open Data Indices Open educational resources Open music model Open Web movement v t e Independent production Reading Alternative comics Alternative manga Fanzine Webcomic business Webtoon Minicomic Co-ops Djinshi conventions printers shops Self publishing Small press Amateur press association Audio Independent music Record label Netlabel Open-source label Radio Station Pirate radio Cassette culture Djin music Lo-fi music Tracker MOD music Podsafe Musical instruments Circuit bending Experimental musical instrument Video Amateur Home movies Amateur film Amateur pornography Fan film Machinima Professional Independent animation Cinema of Transgression Independent film Exploitation film Guerrilla filmmaking B movie Golden Age 50s 60s 70s 80s  present Z movie Midnight movie Low-budget film No-budget film No Wave Cinema Double feature Software Cowboy coding Demoscene Free software Open-source software Software cracking Unofficial patch Warez scene Video games Indie games  development  developers Homebrew Fangame Djin soft Mod Open-source video game ROM hack Food Drinks Independent soft drink Homebrewing Microbrewery Other Indie art Amateur photography Mail art Nave art Outsider art Visionary environment Indie RPG Independent circuit wrestling Independent TV station General Indie design Do it yourself  DIY ethic  Djin Make magazine Maker Faire Social peer-to-peer processes Authority control NDL  01148004 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleOpen-source_software oldid913877110  Categories  Free software Software licenses Hidden categories CS1 errors deprecated parameters Pages using web citations with no URL Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors external links Wikipedia pending changes protected pages Articles with short description Use dmy dates from August 2016 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2012 All articles containing potentially dated statements CS1 errors missing periodical Commons category link is locally defined Articles with Curlie links Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers