Polyoxymethylene From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia    Redirected from Acetal resin  Jump to navigation Jump to search This article needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources   Polyoxymethylene     news    newspapers    books    scholar    JSTOR  March 2016   Learn how and when to remove this template message  Polyoxymethylene Names Other names Polyoxymethylene glycol Polymethylene glycol Identifiers CAS Number 9002-81-7   Y ChemSpider none Properties Chemical formula CH 2 O n Molar mass Variable Appearance Colorless solid Density 1.41 1.42 gcm 3 Magnetic susceptibility   9.3610 6 SI, 22C 1  Except where otherwise noted, data are given for materials in their standard state at 25  C 77  F, 100  kPa. N   verify   what is   Y N   Infobox  references Keck clips made of polyoxymethylene Polyoxymethylene  POM , also known as acetal , 2  polyacetal , and polyformaldehyde , is an engineering thermoplastic used in precision parts requiring high stiffness, low friction, and excellent dimensional stability. As with many other synthetic polymers , it is produced by different chemical firms with slightly different formulas and sold variously by such names as Delrin , Ultraform , Celcon , Ramtal , Duracon , Kepital , Polypenco , and Hostaform . POM is characterized by its high strength, hardness and rigidity to 40  C. POM is intrinsically opaque white, due to its high crystalline composition, but it is available in all colors. POM has a density of 1.410 1.420 gcm 3 . 3  Typical applications for injection-molded POM include high-performance engineering components such as small gear wheels, eyeglass frames, ball bearings, ski bindings, fasteners, guns, knife handles, and lock systems. The material is widely used in the automotive and consumer electronics industry. Contents 1 Development 2 Production 2.1 Homopolymer 2.2 Copolymer 2.3 Fabrication 3 Machining 4 Bonding 5 Usage 6 Degradation 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Development  edit  Polyoxymethylene was discovered by Hermann Staudinger , a German chemist who received the 1953 Nobel Prize in Chemistry . 4  He had studied the polymerization and structure of POM in the 1920s while researching macromolecules , which he characterized as polymers. Due to problems with thermal stability, POM was not commercialized at that time. Around 1952, research chemists at DuPont synthesized a version of POM, 5  and in 1956 the company filed for patent protection of the homopolymer . 6  DuPont credits R. N. MacDonald as the inventor of high-molecular-weight POM. 7  Patents by MacDonald and coworkers describe the preparation of high-molecular-weight hemiacetal -terminated OCH 2 OH POM, 8  but these lack sufficient thermal stability to be commercially viable. The inventor of a heat-stable and therefore useful POM homopolymer was Stephen Dal Nogare, 9  who discovered that reacting the hemiacetal ends with acetic anhydride converts the readily depolymerizable hemiacetal into a thermally stable, melt-processable plastic. In 1960, DuPont completed construction of a plant to produce its own version of acetal resin, named Delrin , at Parkersburg, West Virginia . 10  Also in 1960, Celanese completed its own research. Shortly thereafter, in a limited partnership with the Frankfurt firm Hoechst AG , a factory was built in Kelsterbach , Hessen  from there, Celcon was produced starting in 1962, 11  with Hostaform joining it a year later. Both remain in production under the auspices of Celanese and are sold as parts of a product group now called HostaformCelcon POM . Production  edit  This article needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources   Polyoxymethylene     news    newspapers    books    scholar    JSTOR  March 2016   Learn how and when to remove this template message  Different manufacturing processes are used to produce the homopolymer and copolymer versions of POM. Homopolymer  edit  To make polyoxymethylene homopolymer , anhydrous formaldehyde must be generated. The principal method is by reaction of the aqueous formaldehyde with an alcohol to create a hemiformal , dehydration of the hemiformalwater mixture either by extraction or vacuum distillation  and release of the formaldehyde by heating the hemiformal. The formaldehyde is then polymerized by anionic catalysis , and the resulting polymer stabilized by reaction with acetic anhydride . Due to the manufacturing process, large-diameter cross-sections may have pronounced centerline porosity. 12  A typical example is DuPonts Delrin. Copolymer  edit  The polyoxymethylene copolymer replaces about 11.5 of the CH 2 O groups with CH 2 CH 2 O. 13  To make polyoxymethylene copolymer , formaldehyde is generally converted to trioxane specifically 1,3,5-trioxane , also known as trioxin. This is done by acid catalysis either sulfuric acid or acidic ion-exchange resins  followed by purification of the trioxane by distillation andor extraction to remove water and other active hydrogen-containing impurities. Typical copolymers are Hostaform from Celanese and Ultraform from BASF . The co-monomer is typically dioxolane , but ethylene oxide can also be used. Dioxolane is formed by reaction of ethylene glycol with aqueous formaldehyde over an acid catalyst. Other diols can also be used. Trioxane and dioxolane are polymerized using an acid catalyst, often boron trifluoride etherate , BF 3 OEt 2 . The polymerization can take place in a non-polar solvent in which case the polymer forms as a slurry or in neat trioxane e.g. in an extruder. After polymerization, the acidic catalyst must be deactivated and the polymer stabilized by melt or solution hydrolysis to remove unstable end groups. Stable polymer is melt-compounded, adding thermal and oxidative stabilizers and optionally lubricants and miscellaneous fillers. Fabrication  edit  POM is supplied in a granulated form and can be formed into the desired shape by applying heat and pressure. The two most common forming methods employed are injection molding and extrusion . Rotational molding and blow molding are also possible. Typical applications for injection-molded POM include high-performance engineering components e.g. gear wheels, ski bindings, yoyos , fasteners, lock systems. The material is widely used in the automotive and consumer electronics industry. There are special grades that offer higher mechanical toughness, stiffness or low-frictionwear properties. POM is commonly extruded as continuous lengths of round or rectangular section. These sections can be cut to length and sold as bar or sheet stock for machining. Machining  edit  When supplied as extruded bar or sheet, POM may be machined using traditional methods such as turning, milling, drilling etc. These techniques are best employed where production economics do not merit the expense of melt processing. The material is free-cutting, but does require sharp tools with a high clearance angle. The use of soluble cutting lubricant is not necessary, but is recommended. POM sheets can be cut cleanly and accurately using an infrared laser, such as in a CO 2 laser cutter . Because the material lacks the rigidity of most metals, care should be taken to use light clamping forces and sufficient support for the work piece. As can be the case with many polymers, machined POM can be dimensionally unstable, especially with parts that have large variations in wall thicknesses. It is recommended that such features be designed-out e.g. by adding fillets or strengthening ribs. Annealing of pre-machined parts before final finishing is an alternative. A rule of thumb is that in general, small components machined in POM suffer from less warping. Bonding  edit  POM is typically very difficult to bond. Special processes and treatments have been developed to improve bonding. Typically these processes involve surface etching, flame treatment or mechanical abrasion. Typical etching processes involve chromic acid at elevated temperatures. DuPont uses a patented process for treating acetal homopolymer called satinizing that creates a surface roughness sufficient for micromechanical interlocking. There are also processes involving oxygen plasma and corona discharge. 14  15  Once the surface is prepared, a number of adhesives can be used for bonding. These include epoxies , polyurethanes , and cyanoacrylates . Epoxies have shown 150500  psi 1,0003,400  kPa  citation needed  shear strength on mechanically abraded surfaces and 5001,000  psi 3,4006,900  kPa on chemically treated surfaces. Cyanoacrylates are useful for bonding to metal, leather, rubber and other plastics. Solvent welding is typically unsuccessful on acetal polymers, due to the excellent solvent resistance of acetal.  citation needed  Thermal welding through various methods has been used successfully on both homopolymer and copolymer. 16  Usage  edit  Mechanical gears , sliding and guiding elements, housing parts, springs , chains , screws , nuts, fan wheels, pump parts, valve bodies. Electrical engineering insulators , bobbins , connectors , parts for electronic devices such as televisions , telephones , etc. Vehicle fuel sender unit, lightcontrol stalkcombination switch including shifter for light, turn signal, power windows, door lock systems, articulated shells. Model model railway parts, such as trucks bogies and hand rails handle bars. POM is tougher than ABS , comes in bright translucent colors, and is not paintable. Hobbies radio-controlled helicopter main gear, landing skid, yo-yos , vaping drip tips, KNex 17  etc. Medical insulin pen, metered dose inhalers MDI. Food industry Food and Drug Administration has approved some grades of POM for milk pumps, coffee spigots, filter housings and food conveyors. 18  Furniture hardware , locks , handles , hinges . Construction structural glass - pod holder for point Packaging aerosol cans, vehicle tanks. Sports paintball accessories. It is often used for machined parts of paintball markers that do not require the strength of aluminium, such as handles and reciprocating bolts. POM is also used in airsoft guns to reduce piston noise. Longboarding  puck material for slide gloves help the rider touch the road and lean on their hand to slow down, stop, or perform tricks. Clothing zippers . Music picks , Irish flutes, bagpipes , practice chanters , harpsichord plectra, instrument mouthpieces, tips of some drum sticks. 19  20  Dining fully automatic coffee brewers knife handles particularly folding knives. Horology  watch bracelets e.g. IWC Porsche Design 3701. Vapore-cigarette accessories material used in the manufacturing of most Drip Tips Mouthpiece. Tobacco products The BIC Group uses Delrin for their lighters. 21  Degradation  edit  Chlorine attack of acetal-resin plumbing joint Acetal resins are sensitive to acid hydrolysis and oxidation by agents such as mineral acid and chlorine . POM homopolymer is also susceptible to alkaline attack and is more susceptible to degradation in hot water. Thus low levels of chlorine in potable water supplies 13  ppm can be sufficient to cause environmental stress cracking , a problem experienced in both the USA and Europe in domestic and commercial water supply systems. Defective mouldings are most sensitive to cracking, but normal mouldings can succumb if the water is hot. Both POM homopolymer and copolymer are stabilized to mitigate these types of degradation. In chemistry applications, although the polymer is often suitable for the majority of glassware work, it can succumb to catastrophic failure. An example of this would be using the polymer clips on hot areas of the glassware such as a flask-to-column, column-to-head or head-to-condenser joint during distillation. As the polymer is sensitive to both chlorine and acid hydrolysis , it may perform very poorly when exposed to the reactive gases, particularly hydrogen chloride . Failures in this latter instance can occur with seemingly unimportant exposures from well sealed joints and do so without warning and rapidly the component will split or fall apart. This can be a significant health hazard, as the glass may open or smash. Here, PTFE or a high-grade stainless steel may be a more appropriate choice. In addition, POM can have undesirable characteristics when burned. The flame is not self-extinguishing, shows little to no smoke, and the blue flame can be almost invisible in ambient light. Burning also releases formaldehyde gas, which irritates nose, throat, and eye tissues. See also  edit  Dalziel Hammick Forensic engineering Forensic polymer engineering Paraformaldehyde Polymer degradation Resin References  edit   Wapler, M. C. Leupold, J. Dragonu, I. von Elverfeldt, D. Zaitsev, M. Wallrabe, U. 2014. Magnetic properties of materials for MR engineering, micro-MR and beyond. JMR . 242  233242. arXiv  1403.4760 . Bibcode  2014JMagR.242..233W . doi  10.1016j.jmr.2014.02.005 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  MatWebacetal .  Ticona MSDS for Hostaform . Archived from the original on 2011-05-12. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   The Nobel Prize in Chemistry 1953 . NobelPrize.org . Retrieved 8 March 2016 .  Joseph P. Kennedy Wayne H. Watkins 31 July 2012. How to Invent and Protect Your Invention A Guide to Patents for Scientists and Engineers . John Wiley  Sons. pp.  194. ISBN   978-1-118-41009-7 .  A History of Plastics . British Plastics Federation . Retrieved 8 March 2016 .  News  Media Relations Home - DuPont EMEA  US 2768994    US 2998409    Paul C. Painter Michael M. Coleman 2008. Essentials of Polymer Science and Engineering . DEStech Publications, Inc. pp.  313. ISBN   978-1-932078-75-6 .  Christopher C. Ibeh 25 April 2011. Thermoplastic Materials Properties, Manufacturing Methods, and Applications . CRC Press. pp.  473. ISBN   978-1-4200-9384-1 .  Acetal Products Comparison Acetal vs. Delrin PDF . Lion Engineering Plastics . Retrieved 2016-10-01 .  How to Maximise the Property Advantages of DuPont Delrin Acetal Homopolymer over Acetal Copolymer PDF . DuPont. 2013 . Retrieved 2016-10-01 .  BASF Ultraform product information  Snogren, R. C. 1974. Handbook of Surface Preparation . New York Palmerton Publishing Co.  Tamshell Engineering Corner . Retrieved 15 Sep 2017 .  Ticona Polymer and Processing Expertise Helps Rodon Deliver Successes, Including KNEX Toys . celanese.com . Celanese Corporation . Retrieved 19 March 2016 .  Acetal Plastic Sheet, Rod, Tube and Accessories . Interstate Plastics . Interstate Plastics . Retrieved September 2015 . Check date values in access-date  help   Murphy, Joe. The Loud Buzzer . unknown . Retrieved 2012-03-17 .  Barry, Kenneth. Saxscape Mouthpieces .  BiC Werbefeuerzeuge fr Geschftskunden . www.bic-feuerzeuge.de in German . Retrieved 2017-08-14 . External links  edit  Acetal . Machine Design . November 15, 2002 . Retrieved August 2015 . Check date values in accessdate  help  Acetal POM Engineering Property Data . MatWeb . Retrieved August 2015 . Check date values in accessdate  help  Michael Sepe September 2012. How Do You Like Your Acetal Homopolymer or Copolymer . Plastics Technology . Retrieved August 2015 . Check date values in accessdate  help  Acetal Delrin Copolymer Homopolymer - What are the differences . v t e Plastics Chemical types Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene ABS Cross-linked polyethylene PEX, XLPE Ethylene vinyl acetate EVA Polymethyl methacrylate PMMA Polyethyl methacrylate PEMA Polyacrylic acid PAA Polyamide PA Polybutylene PB Polybutylene terephthalate PBT Polycarbonate PC Polyetheretherketone PEEK Polyester PEs Polyethylene PE Polyethylene terephthalate PET, PETE Polyimide PI Polylactic acid PLA Polyoxymethylene POM Polyphenyl ether PPE Polypropylene PP Polystyrene PS Polysulfone PES Polytetrafluoroethylene PTFE Polyurethane PU Polyvinyl chloride PVC Polyvinylidene chloride PVDC Styrene maleic anhydride SMA Styrene-acrylonitrile SAN Mechanical types Thermoplastic Thermosetting polymer Duroplast Corrugated plastic Polymeric foam High performance plastics Additives Polymer additive Colorants Plasticizer Stabilizer for polymers Biodegradable additives Filler materials Plastics processing injection moulding plastics extrusion stretch-blow molding thermoforming compression molding calendering transfer molding laminating fiberglass molding pultrusion filament winding vacuum forming rotational molding Products Plastics industry Commodity plastics Engineering plastics High-performance plastics Plastic film Plastic bottle Plastic bag Plastic shopping bag Plastic cutlery Blister pack Foam food container Construction Geosynthetics CategoryPlastics applications Environment and health v t e Health issues of plastics and polyhalogenated compounds PHCs Plasticizers  Phthalates DIBP DBP BBP BBzP DIHP DEHP DOP DIDP DINP Miscellaneous plasticizers Organophosphates Adipates  DEHA DOA  Monomers Bisphenol A BPA, in Polycarbonates  Vinyl chloride in PVC  Miscellaneous additives incl. PHCs PBDEs PCBs Organotins PFCs Perfluorooctanoic acid Health issues Teratogen Carcinogen Endocrine disruptor Diabetes Obesity Obesogen Polymer fume fever Pollution Plastic pollution Great Pacific garbage patch Persistent organic pollutant Dioxins List of environmental health hazards Regulations California Proposition 65 European REACH regulation Japan Toxic Substances Law Toxic Substances Control Act Waste Plastic pollution Great Pacific garbage patch Persistent organic pollutant Dioxins List of environmental health hazards Plastic recycling Biodegradable plastic Identification codes Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitlePolyoxymethylene oldid914136958  Categories  DuPont products Plastics Polyethers Thermoplastics Hidden categories CS1 errors deprecated parameters CS1 errors dates CS1 German-language sources de Articles needing additional references from March 2016 All articles needing additional references Chemicals that do not have a ChemSpider ID assigned Chemicals without a PubChem CID Articles without InChI source Articles without EBI source Articles without KEGG source Articles without UNII source Articles containing unverified chemical infoboxes Chembox image size set All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2017