Engineering From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search This article is about the general field called engineering. For the design and building of actual engines, see Engine . For other uses, see Engineering disambiguation . Engineering History Outline Glossary Category Portal v t e The InSight lander with solar panels deployed in a cleanroom The steam engine , a major driver in the Industrial Revolution , underscores the importance of engineering in modern history. This beam engine is on display in the Technical University of Madrid . Engineering is the use of scientific principles to design and build machines, structures, and other items, including bridges, roads, vehicles, and buildings. 1  The discipline of engineering encompasses a broad range of more specialized fields of engineering , each with a more specific emphasis on particular areas of applied mathematics , applied science , and types of application. See glossary of engineering . The term engineering is derived from the Latin ingenium , meaning cleverness and ingeniare , meaning to contrive, devise. 2  Contents 1 Definition 2 History 2.1 Ancient era 2.2 Renaissance era 2.3 Modern era 3 Main branches of engineering 3.1 Chemical engineering 3.2 Civil engineering 3.3 Electrical engineering 3.4 Mechanical engineering 3.5 Interdisciplinary engineering 4 Practice 5 Methodology 5.1 Problem solving 5.2 Computer use 6 Social context 6.1 Code of ethics 7 Relationships with other disciplines 7.1 Science 7.2 Medicine and biology 7.3 Art 7.4 Business 7.5 Other fields 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading Definition  edit  The American Engineers Council for Professional Development ECPD, the predecessor of ABET  3  has defined engineering as The creative application of scientific principles to design or develop structures, machines, apparatus, or manufacturing processes, or works utilizing them singly or in combination or to construct or operate the same with full cognizance of their design or to forecast their behavior under specific operating conditions all as respects an intended function, economics of operat ion and safety to life and property. 4  5  History  edit  Main article History of engineering Relief map of the Citadel of Lille , designed in 1668 by Vauban , the foremost military engineer of his age. Engineering has existed since ancient times, when humans devised inventions such as the wedge, lever, wheel and pulley, etc. The term engineering is derived from the word engineer , which itself dates back to 1390 when an engineer literally, one who builds or operates a siege engine  referred to a constructor of military engines. 6  In this context, now obsolete, an engine referred to a military machine, i.e. , a mechanical contraption used in war for example, a catapult . Notable examples of the obsolete usage which have survived to the present day are military engineering corps, e.g. , the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers . The word engine itself is of even older origin, ultimately deriving from the Latin ingenium c. 1250, meaning innate quality, especially mental power, hence a clever invention. 7  Later, as the design of civilian structures, such as bridges and buildings, matured as a technical discipline, the term civil engineering 5  entered the lexicon as a way to distinguish between those specializing in the construction of such non-military projects and those involved in the discipline of military engineering . Ancient era  edit  The Ancient Romans built aqueducts to bring a steady supply of clean and fresh water to cities and towns in the empire. The pyramids in Egypt, the Acropolis and the Parthenon in Greece, the Roman aqueducts , Via Appia and the Colosseum, Teotihuacn , the Brihadeeswarar Temple of Thanjavur , among many others, stand as a testament to the ingenuity and skill of ancient civil and military engineers. Other monuments, no longer standing, such as the Hanging Gardens of Babylon , and the Pharos of Alexandria were important engineering achievements of their time and were considered among the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World . The earliest civil engineer known by name is Imhotep . 5  As one of the officials of the Pharaoh , Djosr , he probably designed and supervised the construction of the Pyramid of Djoser the Step Pyramid  at Saqqara in Egypt around 26302611 BC. 8  Ancient Greece developed machines in both civilian and military domains. The Antikythera mechanism , the first known mechanical computer , 9  10  and the mechanical inventions of Archimedes are examples of early mechanical engineering. Some of Archimedes inventions as well as the Antikythera mechanism required sophisticated knowledge of differential gearing or epicyclic gearing , two key principles in machine theory that helped design the gear trains of the Industrial Revolution, and are still widely used today in diverse fields such as robotics and automotive engineering . 11  Ancient Chinese, Greek, Roman and Hungarian armies employed military machines and inventions such as artillery which was developed by the Greeks around the 4th century BC, 12  the trireme , the ballista and the catapult . In the Middle Ages, the trebuchet was developed. Renaissance era  edit  A water-powered mine hoist used for raising ore, ca. 1556 Before the development of modern engineering, mathematics was used by artisans and craftsmen, such as millwrights , clockmakers , instrument makers and surveyors. Aside from these professions, universities were not believed to have had much practical significance to technology. 13   32 A standard reference for the state of mechanical arts during the Renaissance is given in the mining engineering treatise De re metallica 1556, which also contains sections on geology, mining and chemistry. De re metallica was the standard chemistry reference for the next 180 years. 13  Modern era  edit  The application of the steam engine allowed coke to be substituted for charcoal in iron making, lowering the cost of iron, which provided engineers with a new material for building bridges. This bridge was made of cast iron , which was soon displaced by less brittle wrought iron as a structural material The science of classical mechanics , sometimes called Newtonian mechanics, formed the scientific basis of much of modern engineering. 13  With the rise of engineering as a profession in the 18th century, the term became more narrowly applied to fields in which mathematics and science were applied to these ends. Similarly, in addition to military and civil engineering, the fields then known as the mechanic arts became incorporated into engineering. Canal building was an important engineering work during the early phases of the Industrial Revolution. 14  John Smeaton was the first self-proclaimed civil engineer and is often regarded as the father of civil engineering. He was an English civil engineer responsible for the design of bridges, canals, harbours, and lighthouses. He was also a capable mechanical engineer and an eminent physicist . Using a model water wheel, Smeaton conducted experiments for seven years, determining ways to increase efficiency. 15   127 Smeaton introduced iron axles and gears to water wheels. 13   69 Smeaton also made mechanical improvements to the Newcomen steam engine . Smeaton designed the third Eddystone Lighthouse 175559 where he pioneered the use of  hydraulic lime  a form of mortar which will set under water and developed a technique involving dovetailed blocks of granite in the building of the lighthouse. He is important in the history, rediscovery of, and development of modern cement , because he identified the compositional requirements needed to obtain hydraulicity in lime work which led ultimately to the invention of Portland cement . Applied science lead to the development of the steam engine. The sequence of events began with the invention the barometer and the measurement of atmospheric pressure by Evangelista Torricelli in 1643, demonstration of the force of atmospheric pressure by Otto von Guericke using the Magdeburg hemispheres in 1656, laboratory experiments by Denis Papin , who built experimental model steam engines and demonstrated the use of a piston, which he published in 1707. Edward Somerset, 2nd Marquess of Worcester published a book of 100 inventions containing a method for raising waters similar to a coffee percolator . Samuel Morland , a mathematician and inventor who worked on pumps, left notes at the Vauxhall Ordinance Office on a steam pump design that Thomas Savery read. In 1698 Savery built a steam pump called The Miners Friend. It employed both vacuum and pressure. 16  Iron merchant Thomas Newcomen , who built the first commercial piston steam engine in 1712, was not known to have any scientific training. 15   32 Jumbo Jet The application of steam powered cast iron blowing cylinders for providing pressurized air for blast furnaces lead to a large increase in iron production in the late 18th century. The higher furnace temperatures made possible with steam powered blast allowed for the use of more lime in blast furnaces , which enabled the transition from charcoal to coke . 17  These innovations lowered the cost of iron, making horse railways and iron bridges practical. The puddling process , patented by Henry Cort in 1784 produced large scale quantities of wrought iron. Hot blast , patented by James Beaumont Neilson in 1828, greatly lowered the amount of fuel needed to smelt iron. With the development of the high pressure steam engine, the power to weight ratio of steam engines made practical steamboats and locomotives possible. 18  New steel making processes, such as the Bessemer process and the open hearth furnace, ushered in an area of heavy engineering in the late 19th century. One of the most famous engineers of the mid 19th century was Isambard Kingdom Brunel , who built railroads, dockyards and steamships. Offshore platform, Gulf of Mexico The Industrial Revolution created a demand for machinery with metal parts, which led to the development of several machine tools . Boring cast iron cylinders with precision was not possible until John Wilkinson invented his boring machine , which is considered the first machine tool . 19  Other machine tools included the screw cutting lathe , milling machine , turret lathe and the metal planer . Precision machining techniques were developed in the first half of the 19th century. These included the use of gigs to guide the machining tool over the work and fixtures to hold the work in the proper position. Machine tools and machining techniques capable of producing interchangeable parts lead to large scale factory production by the late 19th century. 20  The United States census of 1850 listed the occupation of engineer for the first time with a count of 2,000. 21  There were fewer than 50 engineering graduates in the U.S. before 1865. In 1870 there were a dozen U.S. mechanical engineering graduates, with that number increasing to 43 per year in 1875. In 1890, there were 6,000 engineers in civil, mining , mechanical and electrical. 22  There was no chair of applied mechanism and applied mechanics at Cambridge until 1875, and no chair of engineering at Oxford until 1907. Germany established technical universities earlier. 23  The foundations of electrical engineering in the 1800s included the experiments of Alessandro Volta , Michael Faraday , Georg Ohm and others and the invention of the electric telegraph in 1816 and the electric motor in 1872. The theoretical work of James Maxwell see Maxwells equations  and Heinrich Hertz in the late 19th century gave rise to the field of electronics . The later inventions of the vacuum tube and the transistor further accelerated the development of electronics to such an extent that electrical and electronics engineers currently outnumber their colleagues of any other engineering specialty. 5  Chemical engineering developed in the late nineteenth century. 5  Industrial scale manufacturing demanded new materials and new processes and by 1880 the need for large scale production of chemicals was such that a new industry was created, dedicated to the development and large scale manufacturing of chemicals in new industrial plants. 5  The role of the chemical engineer was the design of these chemical plants and processes. 5  The solar furnace at Odeillo in the Pyrnes-Orientales in France can reach temperatures up to 3,500  C 6,330  F Aeronautical engineering deals with aircraft design process design while aerospace engineering is a more modern term that expands the reach of the discipline by including spacecraft design. Its origins can be traced back to the aviation pioneers around the start of the 20th century although the work of Sir George Cayley has recently been dated as being from the last decade of the 18th century. Early knowledge of aeronautical engineering was largely empirical with some concepts and skills imported from other branches of engineering. 24  The first PhD in engineering technically, applied science and engineering  awarded in the United States went to Josiah Willard Gibbs at Yale University in 1863 it was also the second PhD awarded in science in the U.S. 25  Only a decade after the successful flights by the Wright brothers , there was extensive development of aeronautical engineering through development of military aircraft that were used in World War I . Meanwhile, research to provide fundamental background science continued by combining theoretical physics with experiments. Main branches of engineering  edit  For a topical guide to this subject, see Outline of engineering . Hoover Dam Engineering is a broad discipline which is often broken down into several sub-disciplines. Although an engineer will usually be trained in a specific discipline, he or she may become multi-disciplined through experience. Engineering is often characterized as having four main branches 26  27  28  chemical engineering, civil engineering, electrical engineering, and mechanical engineering. Chemical engineering  edit  Main article Chemical engineering Chemical engineering is the application of physics, chemistry, biology, and engineering principles in order to carry out chemical processes on a commercial scale, such as the manufacture of commodity chemicals , specialty chemicals , petroleum refining , microfabrication , fermentation , and biomolecule production . Civil engineering  edit  Main article Civil engineering Civil engineering is the design and construction of public and private works, such as infrastructure airports, roads, railways, water supply, and treatment etc., bridges, tunnels, dams, and buildings. 29  30  Civil engineering is traditionally broken into a number of sub-disciplines, including structural engineering , environmental engineering , and surveying . It is traditionally considered to be separate from military engineering . 31  Electrical engineering  edit  Main article Electrical engineering Electric motor Electrical engineering is the design, study, and manufacture of various electrical and electronic systems, such as Broadcast engineering , electrical circuits , generators , motors , electromagnetic  electromechanical devices, electronic devices , electronic circuits , optical fibers , optoelectronic devices , computer systems, telecommunications , instrumentation, controls, and electronics . Mechanical engineering  edit  Main article Mechanical engineering Mechanical engineering is the design and manufacture of physical or mechanical systems, such as power and energy systems, aerospace  aircraft products, weapon systems , transportation products, engines , compressors , powertrains , kinematic chains , vacuum technology, vibration isolation equipment, manufacturing , and mechatronics . Interdisciplinary engineering  edit  Main article List of engineering branches Interdisciplinary engineering draws from more than one of the principle branches of the practice. Historically, naval engineering and mining engineering were major branches. Other engineering fields are manufacturing engineering , acoustical engineering , corrosion engineering , instrumentation and control , aerospace , automotive , computer , electronic , information engineering , petroleum , environmental , systems , audio , software , architectural , agricultural , biosystems , biomedical , 32  geological , textile , industrial , materials , 33  and nuclear engineering . 34  These and other branches of engineering are represented in the 36 licensed member institutions of the UK Engineering Council . New specialties sometimes combine with the traditional fields and form new branches  for example, Earth systems engineering and management involves a wide range of subject areas including engineering studies , environmental science , engineering ethics and philosophy of engineering . Practice  edit  One who practices engineering is called an engineer , and those licensed to do so may have more formal designations such as Professional Engineer , Chartered Engineer , Incorporated Engineer , Ingenieur , European Engineer , or Designated Engineering Representative . Methodology  edit  This section does not cite any sources . Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .  August 2013   Learn how and when to remove this template message  Design of a turbine requires collaboration of engineers from many fields, as the system involves mechanical, electro-magnetic and chemical processes. The blades , rotor and stator as well as the steam cycle all need to be carefully designed and optimized. In the engineering design process, engineers apply mathematics and sciences such as physics to find novel solutions to problems or to improve existing solutions. More than ever, engineers are now required to have a proficient knowledge of relevant sciences for their design projects. As a result, many engineers continue to learn new material throughout their career. If multiple solutions exist, engineers weigh each design choice based on their merit and choose the solution that best matches the requirements. The crucial and unique task of the engineer is to identify, understand, and interpret the constraints on a design in order to yield a successful result. It is generally insufficient to build a technically successful product, rather, it must also meet further requirements. Constraints may include available resources, physical, imaginative or technical limitations, flexibility for future modifications and additions, and other factors, such as requirements for cost, safety , marketability, productivity, and serviceability . By understanding the constraints, engineers derive specifications for the limits within which a viable object or system may be produced and operated. Problem solving  edit  This section does not cite any sources . Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .  August 2013   Learn how and when to remove this template message  A drawing for a booster engine for steam locomotives . Engineering is applied to design , with emphasis on function and the utilization of mathematics and science. Engineers use their knowledge of science , mathematics , logic , economics , and appropriate experience or tacit knowledge to find suitable solutions to a problem. Creating an appropriate mathematical model of a problem often allows them to analyze it sometimes definitively, and to test potential solutions. Usually, multiple reasonable solutions exist, so engineers must evaluate the different design choices on their merits and choose the solution that best meets their requirements. Genrich Altshuller , after gathering statistics on a large number of patents , suggested that compromises are at the heart of  low-level  engineering designs, while at a higher level the best design is one which eliminates the core contradiction causing the problem. Engineers typically attempt to predict how well their designs will perform to their specifications prior to full-scale production. They use, among other things prototypes , scale models , simulations , destructive tests , nondestructive tests , and stress tests . Testing ensures that products will perform as expected. Engineers take on the responsibility of producing designs that will perform as well as expected and will not cause unintended harm to the public at large. Engineers typically include a factor of safety in their designs to reduce the risk of unexpected failure.  The study of failed products is known as forensic engineering and can help the product designer in evaluating his or her design in the light of real conditions. The discipline is of greatest value after disasters, such as bridge collapses , when careful analysis is needed to establish the cause or causes of the failure. Computer use  edit  A computer simulation of high velocity air flow around a Space Shuttle orbiter during re-entry. Solutions to the flow require modelling of the combined effects of fluid flow and the heat equations . As with all modern scientific and technological endeavors, computers and software play an increasingly important role. As well as the typical business application software there are a number of computer aided applications  computer-aided technologies  specifically for engineering. Computers can be used to generate models of fundamental physical processes, which can be solved using numerical methods . Graphic representation of a minute fraction of the WWW, demonstrating hyperlinks One of the most widely used design tools in the profession is computer-aided design CAD software. It enables engineers to create 3D models, 2D drawings, and schematics of their designs. CAD together with digital mockup DMU and CAE software such as finite element method analysis or analytic element method allows engineers to create models of designs that can be analyzed without having to make expensive and time-consuming physical prototypes. These allow products and components to be checked for flaws assess fit and assembly study ergonomics and to analyze static and dynamic characteristics of systems such as stresses, temperatures, electromagnetic emissions, electrical currents and voltages, digital logic levels, fluid flows, and kinematics. Access and distribution of all this information is generally organized with the use of product data management software. 35  There are also many tools to support specific engineering tasks such as computer-aided manufacturing CAM software to generate CNC machining instructions manufacturing process management software for production engineering EDA for printed circuit board PCB and circuit schematics for electronic engineers MRO applications for maintenance management and Architecture, engineering and construction AEC software for civil engineering. In recent years the use of computer software to aid the development of goods has collectively come to be known as product lifecycle management PLM. 36  Social context  edit  This section possibly contains original research . Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.  July 2010   Learn how and when to remove this template message  Robotic Kismet can produce a range of facial expressions. The engineering profession engages in a wide range of activities, from large collaboration at the societal level, and also smaller individual projects. Almost all engineering projects are obligated to some sort of financing agency a company, a set of investors, or a government. The few types of engineering that are minimally constrained by such issues are pro bono engineering and open-design engineering. By its very nature engineering has interconnections with society, culture and human behavior. Every product or construction used by modern society is influenced by engineering. The results of engineering activity influence changes to the environment, society and economies, and its application brings with it a responsibility and public safety. Engineering projects can be subject to controversy. Examples from different engineering disciplines include the development of nuclear weapons , the Three Gorges Dam , the design and use of sport utility vehicles and the extraction of oil . In response, some western engineering companies have enacted serious corporate and social responsibility policies. Engineering is a key driver of innovation and human development. Sub-Saharan Africa, in particular, has a very small engineering capacity which results in many African nations being unable to develop crucial infrastructure without outside aid.  citation needed  The attainment of many of the Millennium Development Goals requires the achievement of sufficient engineering capacity to develop infrastructure and sustainable technological development. 37  Radar, GPS , lidar , ... are all combined to provide proper navigation and obstacle avoidance vehicle developed for 2007 DARPA Urban Challenge  All overseas development and relief NGOs make considerable use of engineers to apply solutions in disaster and development scenarios. A number of charitable organizations aim to use engineering directly for the good of mankind Engineers Without Borders Engineers Against Poverty Registered Engineers for Disaster Relief Engineers for a Sustainable World Engineering for Change Engineering Ministries International 38  Engineering companies in many established economies are facing significant challenges with regard to the number of professional engineers being trained, compared with the number retiring. This problem is very prominent in the UK where engineering has a poor image and low status. 39  There are many negative economic and political issues that this can cause, as well as ethical issues. 40  It is widely agreed that the engineering profession faces an image crisis, 41  rather than it being fundamentally an unattractive career. Much work is needed to avoid huge problems in the UK and other western economies. Code of ethics  edit  Main article Engineering ethics Many engineering societies have established codes of practice and codes of ethics to guide members and inform the public at large. The National Society of Professional Engineers code of ethics states .mw-parser-output .templatequoteoverflowhiddenmargin1em 0padding0 40px.mw-parser-output .templatequote .templatequoteciteline-height1.5emtext-alignleftpadding-left1.6emmargin-top0 Engineering is an important and learned profession. As members of this profession, engineers are expected to exhibit the highest standards of honesty and integrity. Engineering has a direct and vital impact on the quality of life for all people. Accordingly, the services provided by engineers require honesty, impartiality, fairness, and equity, and must be dedicated to the prot ection of the public health, safety, and welfare. Engineers must perform under a standard of professional behavior that requires adherence to the highest principles of ethical conduct. 42  In Canada, many engineers wear the Iron Ring as a symbol and reminder of the obligations and ethics associated with their profession. 43  Relationships with other disciplines  edit  Science  edit  Scientists study the world as it is engineers create the world that has never been.  Theodore von Krmn 44  45  46  Engineers, scientists and technicians at work on target positioner inside National Ignition Facility NIF target chamber There exists an overlap between the sciences and engineering practice in engineering, one applies science. Both areas of endeavor rely on accurate observation of materials and phenomena. Both use mathematics and classification criteria to analyze and communicate observations.  citation needed  Scientists may also have to complete engineering tasks, such as designing experimental apparatus or building prototypes. Conversely, in the process of developing technology engineers sometimes find themselves exploring new phenomena, thus becoming, for the moment, scientists or more precisely engineering scientists.  citation needed  The International Space Station is used to conduct science experiments of outer space In the book What Engineers Know and How They Know It , 47  Walter Vincenti asserts that engineering research has a character different from that of scientific research. First, it often deals with areas in which the basic physics or chemistry are well understood, but the problems themselves are too complex to solve in an exact manner. There is a real and important difference between engineering and physics as similar to any science field has to do with technology. 48  49  Physics is an exploratory science that seeks knowledge of principles while engineering uses knowledge for practical applications of principles. The former equates an understanding into a mathematical principle while the latter measures variables involved and creates technology. 50  51  52  For technology, physics is an auxiliary and in a way technology is considered as applied physics. 53  Though physics and engineering are interrelated, it does not mean that a physicist is trained to do an engineers job. A physicist would typically require additional and relevant training. 54  Physicists and engineers engage in different lines of work. 55  But PhD physicists who specialize in sectors of engineering physics and applied physics are titled as Technology officer, R D Engineers and System Engineers. 56  An example of this is the use of numerical approximations to the NavierStokes equations to describe aerodynamic flow over an aircraft, or the use of the Finite element method to calculate the stresses in complex components. Second, engineering research employs many semi- empirical methods that are foreign to pure scientific research, one example being the method of parameter variation.  citation needed  As stated by Fung et al. in the revision to the classic engineering text Foundations of Solid Mechanics  Engineering is quite different from science. Scientists try to understand nature. Engineers try to make things that do not exist in nature. Engineers stress innovation and invention. To embody an invention the engineer must put his idea in concrete terms, and design something that people can use. That something can be a complex system, device, a gadget, a material, a method, a computing program, an innovative experiment, a new solution to a problem, or an improvement on what already exists. Since a design has to be realistic and functional, it must have its geometry, dimensions, and characteristics data defined. In the past engineers working on new designs found that they did not have all the required information to make design decisions. Most often , they were limited by insufficient scientific knowledge. Thus they studied mathematics, physics, chemistry, biology and mechanics. Often they had to add to the sciences relevant to their profession. Thus engineering sciences were born. 57  Although engineering solutions make use of scientific principles, engineers must also take into account safety, efficiency, economy, reliability, and constructability or ease of fabrication as well as the environment, ethical and legal considerations such as patent infringement or liability in the case of failure of the solution.  citation needed  Medicine and biology  edit  A 3 tesla clinical MRI scanner . The study of the human body, albeit from different directions and for different purposes, is an important common link between medicine and some engineering disciplines. Medicine aims to sustain, repair, enhance and even replace functions of the human body , if necessary, through the use of technology . Genetically engineered mice expressing green fluorescent protein , which glows green under blue light. The central mouse is wild-type . Modern medicine can replace several of the bodys functions through the use of artificial organs and can significantly alter the function of the human body through artificial devices such as, for example, brain implants and pacemakers . 58  59  The fields of bionics and medical bionics are dedicated to the study of synthetic implants pertaining to natural systems. Conversely, some engineering disciplines view the human body as a biological machine worth studying and are dedicated to emulating many of its functions by replacing biology with technology. This has led to fields such as artificial intelligence , neural networks , fuzzy logic , and robotics . There are also substantial interdisciplinary interactions between engineering and medicine. 60  61  Both fields provide solutions to real world problems. This often requires moving forward before phenomena are completely understood in a more rigorous scientific sense and therefore experimentation and empirical knowledge is an integral part of both. Medicine, in part, studies the function of the human body. The human body, as a biological machine, has many functions that can be modeled using engineering methods. 62  The heart for example functions much like a pump, 63  the skeleton is like a linked structure with levers, 64  the brain produces electrical signals etc. 65  These similarities as well as the increasing importance and application of engineering principles in medicine, led to the development of the field of biomedical engineering that uses concepts developed in both disciplines. Newly emerging branches of science, such as systems biology , are adapting analytical tools traditionally used for engineering, such as systems modeling and computational analysis, to the description of biological systems. 62  Art  edit  Leonardo da Vinci , seen here in a self-portrait, has been described as the epitome of the artistengineer. 66  He is also known for his studies on human anatomy and physiology . There are connections between engineering and art, for example, architecture , landscape architecture and industrial design even to the extent that these disciplines may sometimes be included in a universitys Faculty of Engineering. 67  68  69  The Art Institute of Chicago , for instance, held an exhibition about the art of NASA s aerospace design. 70  Robert Maillart s bridge design is perceived by some to have been deliberately artistic. 71  At the University of South Florida , an engineering professor, through a grant with the National Science Foundation , has developed a course that connects art and engineering. 67  72  Among famous historical figures, Leonardo da Vinci is a well-known Renaissance artist and engineer, and a prime example of the nexus between art and engineering. 66  73  Business  edit  Business Engineering deals with the relationship between professional engineering, IT systems, business administration and change management . Engineering management or Management engineering is a specialized field of management concerned with engineering practice or the engineering industry sector. The demand for management-focused engineers or from the opposite perspective, managers with an understanding of engineering, has resulted in the development of specialized engineering management degrees that develop the knowledge and skills needed for these roles. During an engineering management course , students will develop industrial engineering skills, knowledge, and expertise, alongside knowledge of business administration, management techniques, and strategic thinking. Engineers specializing in change management must have in-depth knowledge of the application of industrial and organizational psychology principles and methods. Professional engineers often train as certified management consultants in the very specialized field of management consulting applied to engineering practice or the engineering sector. This work often deals with large scale complex business transformation or Business process management initiatives in aerospace and defence, automotive, oil and gas, machinery, pharmaceutical, food and beverage, electrical  electronics, power distribution  generation, utilities and transportation systems. This combination of technical engineering practice, management consulting practice, industry sector knowledge, and change management expertise enables professional engineers who are also qualified as management consultants to lead major business transformation initiatives. These initiatives are typically sponsored by C-level executives. Other fields  edit  In political science , the term engineering has been borrowed for the study of the subjects of social engineering and political engineering , which deal with forming political and social structures using engineering methodology coupled with political science principles. Financial engineering has similarly borrowed the term. See also  edit  media all and max-width720px.mw-parser-output .mobile-float-resetfloatnoneimportantwidth100important.mw-parser-output .stack-containerbox-sizingborder-box.mw-parser-output .stack-clear-leftfloatleftclearleft.mw-parser-output .stack-clear-rightfloatrightclearright.mw-parser-output .stack-leftfloatleft.mw-parser-output .stack-rightfloatright.mw-pa rser-output .stack-objectmargin1pxoverflowhidden Engineering portal Main article Outline of engineering Lists List of engineering topics List of engineers Engineering society List of aerospace engineering topics List of basic chemical engineering topics List of electrical engineering topics List of genetic engineering topics List of mechanical engineering topics List of nanoengineering topics List of software engineering topics Glossaries Glossary of engineering Glossary of areas of mathematics Glossary of biology Glossary of chemistry Glossary of physics Related subjects Controversies over the term Engineer Design Earthquake engineering Engineer Engineering economics Engineering education Engineering education research Engineers Without Borders Forensic engineering Global Engineering Education Industrial design Infrastructure Mathematics Open-source hardware Reverse engineering Science and technology Structural failure Sustainable engineering Women in engineering Planned obsolescence References  edit   definition of engineering from the httpsdictionary.cambridge.orgdictionaryenglish Cambridge Academic Content Dictionary  Cambridge University  About IAENG . iaeng.org . International Association of Engineers . Retrieved 17 December 2016 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  1  Engineers Council for Professional Development. 1947. Canons of ethics for engineers  a b c d e f g 2 Includes Britannica article on Engineering  engineer . Oxford English Dictionary 3rd ed.. Oxford University Press. September 2005.   Subscription or UK public library membership required.  Origin 12501300 ME engin  AF, OF  L ingenium nature, innate quality, esp. mental power, hence a clever invention, equiv. to in-  -genium, equiv. to gen- begetting Source Random House Unabridged Dictionary, Random House, Inc. 2006.  Kemp, Barry J. May 7, 2007. Ancient Egypt Anatomy of a Civilisation . Routledge . p.  159. ISBN   9781134563883 .   The Antikythera Mechanism Research Project Archived 2008-04-28 at the Wayback Machine , The Antikythera Mechanism Research Project. Retrieved 2007-07-01 Quote The Antikythera Mechanism is now understood to be dedicated to astronomical phenomena and operates as a complex mechanical computer which tracks the cycles of the Solar System.  Wilford, John July 31, 2008. Discovering How Greeks Computed in 100 B.C. The New York Times .  Wright, M T. 2005. Epicyclic Gearing and the Antikythera Mechanism, part 2. Antiquarian Horology . 29 1 September 2005 5460.  Britannica on Greek civilization in the 5th century Military technology Quote The 7th century, by contrast, had witnessed rapid innovations, such as the introduction of the hoplite and the trireme, which still were the basic instruments of war in the 5th. and But it was the development of artillery that opened an epoch, and this invention did not predate the 4th century. It was first heard of in the context of Sicilian warfare against Carthage in the time of Dionysius I of Syracuse.  a b c d Musson Robinso 1969. Science and Technology in the Industrial Revolution . University of Toronto Press.  Taylor, George Rogers 1969. The Transportation Revolution, 1815-1860 . ISBN   978-0873321013 .  a b Rosen, William 2012. The Most Powerful Idea in the World A Story of Steam, Industry and Invention . University Of Chicago Press. ISBN   978-0226726342 .  Jenkins, Rhys 1936. Links in the History of Engineering and Technology from Tudor Times . Ayer Publishing. p.  66. ISBN   978-0-8369-2167-0 .  Tylecote, R.F. 1992. A History of Metallurgy, Second Edition . London Maney Publishing, for the Institute of Materials. ISBN   978-0901462886 .  Hunter, Louis C. 1985. A History of Industrial Power in the United States, 17301930, Vol. 2 Steam Power . Charolttesville University Press of Virginia.  Roe, Joseph Wickham 1916, English and American Tool Builders , New Haven, Connecticut Yale University Press, LCCN   16011753  Hounshell, David A. 1984, From the American System to Mass Production, 1800-1932 The Development of Manufacturing Technology in the United States , Baltimore, Maryland Johns Hopkins University Press, ISBN   978-0-8018-2975-8 , LCCN   83016269  Cowan, Ruth Schwartz 1997, A Social History of American Technology , New York Oxford University Press, p.  138, ISBN   978-0-19-504605-2  Hunter, Louis C. 1985. A History of Industrial Power in the United States, 17301930, Vol. 2 Steam Power . Charlottesville University Press of Virginia.  Williams, Trevor I. 1982. A Short History of Twentieth Century Technology . US Oxford University Press. p.  3. ISBN   978-0198581598 .  Van Every, Kermit E. 1986. Aeronautical engineering. Encyclopedia Americana . 1 . Grolier Incorporated. p.  226.  Wheeler, Lynde, Phelps 1951. Josiah Willard Gibbs   the History of a Great Mind . Ox Bow Press. ISBN   978-1-881987-11-6 .  Journal of the British Nuclear Energy Society Volume 1 British Nuclear Energy Society  1962  Snippet view Quote In most universities it should be possible to cover the main branches of engineering, i.e. civil, mechanical, electrical and chemical engineering in this way. More specialised fields of engineering application, of which nuclear power is  ...  The Engineering Profession by Sir James Hamilton, UK Engineering Council Quote The Civilingenior degree encompasses the main branches of engineering civil, mechanical, electrical, chemical. From the Internet Archive  Indu Ramchandani 2000. Students Britannica India,7vol.Set . Popular Prakashan. p.  146. ISBN   978-0-85229-761-2 . Retrieved 23 March 2013 . BRANCHES There are traditionally four primary engineering disciplines civil, mechanical, electrical and chemical.  History and Heritage of Civil Engineering . ASCE . Archived from the original on 16 February 2007 . Retrieved 8 August 2007 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   What is Civil Engineering . Institution of Civil Engineers . Retrieved 15 May 2017 .  Watson, J. Garth. Civil Engineering . Encyclopaedia Britannica .  Bronzino JD, ed., The Biomedical Engineering Handbook, CRC Press, 2006, ISBN   0-8493-2121-2  Bensaude-Vincent, Bernadette March 2001. The construction of a discipline Materials science in the United States. Historical Studies in the Physical and Biological Sciences . 31 2 22348. doi  10.1525hsps.2001.31.2.223 .  Archived copy PDF . Archived from the original PDF on 2011-09-29 . Retrieved 2011-08-02 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  CS1 maint archived copy as title  link   Arbe, Katrina 2001-05-07. PDM Not Just for the Big Boys Anymore . ThomasNet. Archived from the original on 2010-08-06 . Retrieved 2006-12-30 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   Arbe, Katrina 2003-05-22. The Latest Chapter in CAD Software Evaluation . ThomasNet. Archived from the original on 2010-08-06 . Retrieved 2006-12-30 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   Jowitt, Paul W. 2006. Engineering Civilisation from the Shadows PDF . Archived from the original PDF on 2006-10-06. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Home page for EMI Archived 2012-04-14 at the Wayback Machine  engineeringuk.comAbout_us . Archived from the original on 2014-05-30. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Archived copy . Archived from the original on 2014-06-19 . Retrieved 2014-06-19 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  CS1 maint archived copy as title  link   Archived copy . Archived from the original on 2014-10-06 . Retrieved 2014-06-19 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  CS1 maint archived copy as title  link   Code of Ethics , National Society of Professional Engineers  Origin of the Iron Ring concept  Rosakis, Ares Chair, Division of Engineering and Applied Science. Chairs Message, Caltech . Archived from the original on 4 November 2011 . Retrieved 15 October 2011 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Ryschkewitsch, M.G. NASA Chief Engineer. Improving the capability to Engineer Complex Systems  Broadening the Conversation on the Art and Science of Systems Engineering PDF . p.  8 of 21 . Retrieved 15 October 2011 .  American Society for Engineering Education 1970. Engineering education . 60 . American Society for Engineering Education. p.  467. The great engineer Theodore von Karman once said, Scientists study the world as it is, engineers create the world that never has been. Today, more than ever, the engineer must create a world that never has been  ...  Vincenti, Walter G. 1993. What Engineers Know and How They Know It Analytical Studies from Aeronautical History . Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN   978-0-8018-3974-0 .  Walter G Whitman August Paul Peck. Whitman-Peck Physics . American Book Company, 1946, p. 06 . OCLC   3247002  Ateneo de Manila University Press. Philippine Studies, vol. 11, no. 4, 1963. p. 600  Relationship between physics and electrical engineering. Journal of the A.I.E.E . 46 2 107108. 1927. doi  10.1109JAIEE.1927.6534988 .  Puttaswamaiah. Future Of Economic Science . Oxford and IBH Publishing, 2008, p. 208.  Yoseph Bar-Cohen, Cynthia L. Breazeal. Biologically Inspired Intelligent Robots. SPIE Press, 2003. ISBN   9780819448729 . p. 190  C. Morn, E. Tremps, A. Garca, J.A. Somolinos 2011 The Physics and its Relation with the Engineering, INTED2011 Proceedings pp. 592934 . ISBN   978-84-614-7423-3  R Gazzinelli, R L Moreira, W N Rodrigues. Physics and Industrial Development Bridging the Gap . World Scientific, 1997, p. 110.  Steve Fuller. Knowledge Management Foundations. Routledge, 2012. ISBN   9781136389825 . p. 92  Industrial Physicists Primarily specialising in Engineering PDF . American Institute for Physics. October 2016.  Classical and Computational Solid Mechanics, YC Fung and P. Tong . World Scientific. 2001.  Ethical Assessment of Implantable Brain Chips. Ellen M. McGee and G.Q. Maguire, Jr. from Boston University  IEEE technical paper Foreign parts electronic body implants.by Evans-Pughe, C. quote from summary Feeling threatened by cyborgs  Institute of Medicine and Engineering Mission statement The mission of the Institute for Medicine and Engineering IME is to stimulate fundamental research at the interface between biomedicine and engineeringphysicalcomputational sciences leading to innovative applications in biomedical research and clinical practice. Archived 2007-03-17 at the Wayback Machine  IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Both general and technical articles on current technologies and methods used in biomedical and clinical engineering  ...  a b Royal Academy of Engineering and Academy of Medical Sciences Systems Biology a vision for engineering and medicine in pdf quote1 Systems Biology is an emerging methodology that has yet to be defined quote2 It applies the concepts of systems engineering to the study of complex biological systems through iteration between computational or mathematical modelling and experimentation. Archived 2007-04-10 at the Wayback Machine  Science Museum of Minnesota Online Lesson 5a The heart as a pump  Minnesota State University emuseum Bones act as levers Archived 2008-12-20 at the Wayback Machine  UC Berkeley News UC researchers create model of brains electrical storm during a seizure  a b Bjerklie, David. The Art of Renaissance Engineering. MITs Technology Review Jan.Feb.1998 5459. Article explores the concept of the artist-engineer, an individual who used his artistic talent in engineering. Quote from article Da Vinci reached the pinnacle of artist-engineer-dom, Quote2 It was Leonardo da Vinci who initiated the most ambitious expansion in the role of artist-engineer, progressing from astute observer to inventor to theoretician. Bjerklie 58  a b National Science FoundationThe Art of Engineering Professor uses the fine arts to broaden students engineering perspectives  MIT WorldThe Art of Engineering Inventor James Dyson on the Art of Engineering quote A member of the British Design Council, James Dyson has been designing products since graduating from the Royal College of Art in 1970. Archived 2006-07-05 at the Wayback Machine  University of Texas at Dallas The Institute for Interactive Arts and Engineering  Aerospace Design The Art of Engineering from NASAs Aeronautical Research . Archived from the original on 2003-08-15 . Retrieved 2007-03-31 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   Princeton U Robert Maillarts Bridges The Art of Engineering quote no doubt that Maillart was fully conscious of the aesthetic implications  ...  quote..the tools of artists and the perspective of engineers.. Archived 2007-09-27 at the Wayback Machine  Drew U user website cites Bjerklie paper Archived 2007-04-19 at the Wayback Machine Further reading  edit  .mw-parser-output .refbeginfont-size90margin-bottom0.5em.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indentsullist-style-typenonemargin-left0.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indentsulli,.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indentsdlddmargin-left0padding-left3.2emtext-indent-3.2emlist-stylenone.mw-parser-output .refbegin-100font-size100 Blockley, David 2012. Engineering a very short introduction . New York Oxford University Press. ISBN   978-0-19-957869-6 . Dorf, Richard , ed. 2005. The Engineering Handbook 2 ed.. Boca Raton CRC. ISBN   978-0-8493-1586-2 . Billington, David P. 1996-06-05. The Innovators The Engineering Pioneers Who Made America Modern . Wiley New Ed edition. ISBN   978-0-471-14026-9 . Madhavan, Guru 2015. Applied Minds How Engineers Think . W.W. Norton. Petroski, Henry 1992-03-31. To Engineer is Human The Role of Failure in Successful Design . Vintage. ISBN   978-0-679-73416-1 . Lord, Charles R. 2000-08-15. Guide to Information Sources in Engineering . Libraries Unlimited. doi  10.13361563086999 . ISBN   978-1-56308-699-1 . Vincenti, Walter G. 1993-02-01. What Engineers Know and How They Know It Analytical Studies from Aeronautical History . The Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN   978-0-8018-4588-8 . The dictionary definition of engineering at Wiktionary Learning materials related to Engineering at Wikiversity Quotations related to Engineering at Wikiquote v t e Engineering Civil Architectural Construction Environmental Earthquake Geotechnical Hydraulic Mining Structural Transportation Mechanical Acoustical Aerospace Automotive Marine Railway Thermal Electrical Computer Control Electromechanics Electronics Microwaves Power Radio Frequency Telecommunications Chemical Biochemical Biological Molecular Petroleum Process Reaction Interdisciplinary Audio Biomedical Engineering mathematics Engineering mechanics Engineering physics Engineering science Fire Industrial Information Materials science Ceramics Metallurgy Polymer Mechatronics Military Nanotechnology Nuclear Optical Photonics Privacy Robotics Sanitary Security Software Systems Glossaries Engineering Aerospace engineering Civil engineering Electrical and electronics engineering Mechanical engineering Structural engineering List of engineering branches CategoryEngineering Engineering portal v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analyticsynthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Commensurability Consilience Construct Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific law Scientific method Scientific revolution Scientific theory Testability Theory choice Theory-ladenness Underdetermination Unity of science Metatheory of science Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Instrumentalism Pragmatism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism   Reductionism   Determinism Rationalism   Empiricism Received view   Semantic view of theories Scientific realism   Anti-realism Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Vitalism Philosophy of Physics thermal and statistical Motion Chemistry Biology Environment Geography Social science Technology Engineering Artificial intelligence Computer science Information Mind Psychiatry Psychology Perception Space and time Related topics Alchemy Criticism of science Epistemology Faith and rationality History and philosophy of science History of science History of evolutionary thought Logic Metaphysics Pseudoscience Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Sociology of scientific knowledge Sociology of scientific ignorance Philosophers of science by era Ancient Plato Aristotle Stoicism Epicureans Medieval Averroes Avicenna Roger Bacon William of Ockham Hugh of Saint Victor Dominicus Gundissalinus Robert Kilwardby Early modern Francis Bacon Thomas Hobbes Ren Descartes Galileo Galilei Pierre Gassendi Isaac Newton David Hume Late modern Immanuel Kant Friedrich Schelling William Whewell Auguste Comte John Stuart Mill Herbert Spencer Wilhelm Wundt Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Henri Poincar Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Contemporary Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Albert Einstein Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Jrgen Habermas Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Daniel Dennett Portal Category v t e Glossaries of science and engineering Aerospace engineering Archaeology Architecture Artificial intelligence Astronomy Biology Botany Calculus Chemistry Civil engineering Clinical research Computer science Ecology Economics Electrical and electronics engineering Engineering Entomology Environmental science Genetics Geography Geology Machine vision Mathematics Mechanical engineering Medicine Meteorology Physics Probability and statistics Psychiatry Robotics Speciation Structural engineering v t e Major industries Heavy Light Primary industry Agriculture Flowers Horticulture Coffee Meat Fishing Forestry Mining Petroleum Oil shale Secondary industry Manufacturing Aerospace Arms Automotive Shipbuilding Chemical Plastics Meat packing Textile Tertiary industry Creative Advertising Fashion Film Music Video games Education Financial services Insurance Health care Hospitality Professional services Software Tourism Alcohol Bicycle Computer Construction Dredging Electric power Electronics Semiconductor Energy Renewable energy Engineering Entertainment Food Bushfood Fur Gaming Online gambling Information Language Leisure Naval stores Payment card Personal care Pharmaceutical Poverty Pulp and paper Radio Real estate Housing Security Sex Space Sport Tobacco Water Authority control BNF  cb11950236f data GND  4137304-2 LCCN  sh85043176 NARA  10639710 NDL  00566144 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleEngineering oldid914317342  Categories  Engineering Engineering occupations Ethics Philosophy of science Hidden categories Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors deprecated parameters CS1 maint archived copy as title Articles needing additional references from August 2013 All articles needing additional references Articles that may contain original research from July 2010 All articles that may contain original research All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2013 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2013 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2011 Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers Wikipedia articles with NARA identifiers Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers