Systems Modeling Language From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Sysml diagrams collage The Systems Modeling Language  SysML  1  is a general-purpose modeling language for systems engineering applications. It supports the specification, analysis , design , verification and validation of a broad range of systems and systems-of-systems . SysML was originally developed by an open source specification project, and includes an open source license for distribution and use. 2  SysML is defined as an extension of a subset of the Unified Modeling Language UML using UMLs profile mechanism . The languages extensions were designed to support systems engineering activities. Contents 1 Contrast with UML 2 History 2.1 OMG SysML 3 Diagrams 4 Tools 4.1 Model exchange 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Contrast with UML  edit  SysML offers systems engineers several noteworthy improvements over UML, which tends to be software-centric. These improvements include the following 2  SysMLs semantics are more flexible and expressive. SysML reduces UMLs software-centric restrictions and adds two new diagram types, requirement and parametric diagrams. The former can be used for requirements engineering  the latter can be used for performance analysis and quantitative analysis . Consequent to these enhancements, SysML is able to model a wide range of systems, which may include hardware, software, information, processes, personnel, and facilities. SysML is a comparatively little language that is easier to learn and apply. 3  Since SysML removes many of UMLs software-centric constructs, the overall language measures smaller both in diagram types and total constructs. SysML allocation tables support common kinds of allocations. Whereas UML provides only limited support for tabular notations, SysML furnishes flexible allocation tables that support requirements allocation, functional allocation, and structural allocation. This capability facilitates automated verification and validation V V and gap analysis. SysML model management constructs support models, views, and viewpoints. These constructs extend UMLs capabilities and are architecturally aligned with IEEE-Std-1471-2000 IEEE Recommended Practice for Architectural Description of Software Intensive Systems. SysML reuses seven of UML 2s fourteen diagrams, and adds two diagrams requirement and parametric diagrams for a total of nine diagram types. SysML also supports allocation tables, a tabular format that can be dynamically derived from SysML allocation relationships. A table which compares SysML and UML 2 diagrams is available in the SysML FAQ. 4  Consider modeling an automotive system with SysML one can use Requirement diagrams to efficiently capture functional, performance, and interface requirements, whereas with UML one is subject to the limitations of use case diagrams to define high-level functional requirements. Likewise, with SysML one can use Parametric diagrams to precisely define performance and quantitative constraints like maximum acceleration , minimum curb weight , and total air conditioning capacity. UML provides no straightforward mechanism to capture this sort of essential performance and quantitative information. Concerning the rest of the automotive system, enhanced activity diagrams and state machine diagrams can be used to specify the embedded software control logic and information flows for the on-board automotive computers. Other SysML structural and behavioral diagrams can be used to model factories that build the automobiles, as well as the interfaces between the organizations that work in the factories. History  edit  The SysML initiative originated in a January 2001 decision by the International Council on Systems Engineering INCOSE Model Driven Systems Design workgroup to customize the UML for systems engineering applications. Following this decision, INCOSE and the Object Management Group OMG, which maintains the UML specification, jointly chartered the OMG Systems Engineering Domain Special Interest Group SE DSIG in July 2001. The SE DSIG, with support from INCOSE and the ISO AP 233 workgroup, developed the requirements for the modeling language, which were subsequently issued by the OMG parting in the UML for Systems Engineering Request for Proposal UML for SE RFP OMG document ad03-03-41 in March 2003. 5  In 2003 Cris Kobryn and Sanford Friedenthal organized and co-chaired the SysML Partners , an informal association of industry leaders and tool vendors, 6  which initiated an open source specification project to develop the SysML in response to the UML for Systems Engineering RFP. 7  The original technical contributors and co-authors of the SysML 1.0a specification were Laurent Balmelli, Conrad Bock, Rick Steiner, Alan Moore and Roger Burkhart. The SysML Partners distributed their first open source SysML specification drafts in 2004, and submitted SysML 1.0a to the OMG for technology adoption in November 2005. OMG SysML  edit  After a series of competing SysML specification proposals, a SysML Merge Team was proposed to the OMG in April 2006. 8  This proposal was voted upon and adopted by the OMG in July 2006 as OMG SysML, to differentiate it from the original open source specification from which it was derived. Because OMG SysML is derived from open source SysML, it also includes an open source license for distribution and use. The OMG SysML v. 1.0 specification was issued by the OMG as an Available Specification in September 2007. 9  The current version of OMG SysML is v1.5, which was issued by the OMG in May 2017. 10  In addition, SysML was published by the International Organization for Standardization ISO in 2017 as a full International Standard IS, ISOIEC 195142017 Information technology -- Object management group systems modeling language. 11  The OMG has been working on the next generation of SysML and issued a Request for Proposals RFP for version 2 on December 8, 2017, following its open standardization process. 12  13  The resulting specification, which will incorporate language enhancements from experience applying the language, will include a UML profile, a metamodel , and a mapping between the profile and metamodel. 12  A second RFP for a SysML v2 Application Programming Interface API and Services RFP was issued in June 2018. Its aim is to enhance the interoperability of model-based systems engineering tools. Diagrams  edit  SysML includes 9 types of diagram, some of which are taken from UML . Block definition diagram Internal block diagram Package diagram Use case diagram Requirement Diagram Activity diagram Sequence diagram State machine diagram Parametric diagram Tools  edit  There are several modeling tool vendors already offering SysML support, or are in the process of updating their tools to comply with the OMG SysML specification. Lists of tool vendors who support, or have announced support of, SysML or OMG SysML can be found on the SysML Forum 14  or SysML 15  websites, respectively. Model exchange  edit  As an OMG UML 2.0 profile , SysML models are designed to be exchanged using the XML Metadata Interchange XMI standard. In addition, architectural alignment work is underway to support the ISO 10303 also known as STEP, the Standard for the Exchange of Product model data AP-233 standard for exchanging and sharing information between systems engineering software applications and tools. See also  edit  SoaML Energy Systems Language Object Process Methodology Universal Systems Language References  edit   Flexible Views for View-based Model-driven Development By Burger, Erik. KIT Scientific Publishing, Nov 14, 2014. Pg. 250.  a b SysML Forum. SysML FAQ . Retrieved 2018-12-03 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Embedded Systems Security. By David Kleidermacher, Mike Kleidermacher. Elsevier, 2012. Pg 180.  SysML Forum SysML FAQ - What is SysML, Why use SysML, Who created SysML . sysmlforum.com . Retrieved 2014-12-04 .  OMG SE DSIG. UML for Systems Engineering RFP . Retrieved 2006-06-29 .  SysML Partners . Retrieved 2006-06-29 .  SysML Forum. SysML FAQ . Archived from the original on 2006-07-16 . Retrieved 2006-06-29 .  OMG document ad06-03-01 Archived 2008-12-01 at the Wayback Machine  SysML 1.0 . omg.org . Retrieved 2014-12-04 .  SysML . omg.org . Retrieved 2017-07-03 .  ISOIEC 195142017 - Information technology -- Object management group systems modeling language OMG SysML . www.iso.org . Retrieved 2017-12-29 .  a b sysml-roadmapsysml_v2_requirements_review_page OMG SysML Portal  . www.omgwiki.org . Retrieved 2017-12-29 .  httpthemeforest.netuserdan_fisher . OMG Process Introduction  Object Management Group . www.omg.org . Retrieved 2017-12-29 .  SysML Forum What is SysML - What You Need to Know . sysmlforum.com . Retrieved 2014-12-04 .  OMG SysML . omgsysml.org . Retrieved 2014-12-04 . Further reading  edit  Balmelli, Laurent 2007. An Overview of the Systems Modeling Language for Products and Systems Development PDF . Journal of Object Technology, vol. 6, no. 6, JulyAugust 2007, pp. 149-177. Delligatti, Lenny 2013. SysML Distilled A Brief Guide to the Systems Modeling Language . Addison-Wesley Professional. ISBN   978-0-321-92786-6 . Holt, Jon 2008. SysML for Systems Engineering . The Institution of Engineering and Technology. ISBN   978-0-86341-825-9 . Weilkiens, Tim 2008. Systems Engineering with SysMLUML Modeling, Analysis, Design . Morgan Kaufmann  The OMG Press. ISBN   0-12-374274-9 . Friedenthal, Sanford Moore, Alan Steiner, Rick 2016. A Practical Guide to SysML The Systems Modeling Language Third ed.. Morgan Kaufmann  The OMG Press. ISBN   978-0-12-800202-5 . External links  edit  Introduction to Systems Modeling Language SysML, Part 1 and Part 2 . YouTube. SysML Open Source Specification Project Provides information related to SysML open source specifications, FAQ, mailing lists, and open source licenses. OMG SysML Website Furnishes information related to the OMG SysML specification, SysML tutorial, papers, and tool vendor information. Article  EE Times article on SysML May 8, 2006  SE2 MBSE Challenge team  Telescope Modeling  Paper  System Modelling Language explained  PDF format List of Popular SysML Modeling Tools v t e Systems engineering Subfields Aerospace engineering Biological systems engineering Configuration management Earth systems engineering and management Electrical engineering Enterprise systems engineering Performance engineering Reliability engineering Safety engineering Processes Requirements engineering Functional specification System integration Verification and validation Design review Concepts Business process System System lifecycle V-Model Systems development life cycle Tools Decision-making Function modelling IDEF Optimization Quality function deployment System dynamics Systems Modeling Language Systems analysis Systems modeling Work breakdown structure People James S. Albus Ruzena Bajcsy Benjamin S. Blanchard Wernher von Braun Kathleen Carley Harold Chestnut Wolt Fabrycky Barbara Grosz Arthur David Hall III Derek Hitchins Robert E. Machol Radhika Nagpal Simon Ramo Joseph Francis Shea Katia Sycara Manuela M. Veloso John N. Warfield Related fields Control engineering Computer engineering Industrial engineering Operations research Project management Quality management Risk management Software engineering Category v t e Systems Modeling Language Actors International Council on Systems Engineering Object Management Group SysML Partners Cris Kobryn Concepts Activity Actor Association Attribute Block diagram Event Functional flow block diagram Generalization Inheritance Interface Message passing Object composition Object-oriented analysis and design Package Parametric equation Profile State Use case Other topics Systems engineering Unified Modeling Language XML Metadata Interchange v t e Unified Modeling Language Actors Organizations Object Management Group UML Partners Persons Grady Booch Ivar Jacobson James Rumbaugh Concepts Object oriented Object-oriented programming Object-oriented analysis and design Object-oriented modeling Structure Actor Attribute Artifact Class Component Interface Object Package Profile diagram Behavior Activity Event Message Method State Use case Relationships Association Composition Dependency Generalization or Inheritance  Extensibility Profile Stereotype Other Multiplicity Diagrams Structure Class Component Composite structure Deployment Object Package Behaviour Activity State Machine Use case Interaction Communications Sequence Interaction overview Timing Derived languages Systems Modeling Language SysML UML eXchange Format UXF XML Metadata Interchange XMI Executable UML xUML Other topics Glossary of UML terms Rational Unified Process List of Unified Modeling Language tools Object Modeling in Color Authority control BNF  cb159920807 data GND  7537632-5 LCCN  sh2007009867 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSystems_Modeling_Language oldid892021584  Categories  Systems Modeling Language Unified Modeling Language Systems engineering Modeling languages Hidden categories Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers