Mechanical engineering From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Engineering discipline and economic branch Mechanical engineering Occupation Names Mechanical engineer Activity sectors applied mechanics , dynamics , thermodynamics , fluid mechanics , heat transfer , production technology, and others Description Competencies technical knowledge, management skills, design see also glossary of mechanical engineering  Education required See professional requirements below Fields of employment technology , science , exploration , military Mechanical engineering is the discipline that applies engineering , physics , engineering mathematics , and materials science principles to design , analyze, manufacture, and maintain mechanical systems . It is one of the oldest and broadest of the engineering disciplines . The mechanical engineering field requires an understanding of core areas including mechanics , dynamics , thermodynamics , materials science , structural analysis , and electricity . In addition to these core principles, mechanical engineers use tools such as computer-aided design CAD, computer-aided manufacturing CAM, and product life cycle management to design and analyze manufacturing plants , industrial equipment and machinery , heating and cooling systems , transport systems, aircraft , watercraft , robotics , medical devices , weapons , and others. It is the branch of engineering that involves the design, production, and operation of machinery . 1  2  Mechanical engineering emerged as a field during the Industrial Revolution in Europe in the 18th century however, its development can be traced back several thousand years around the world. In the 19th century, developments in physics led to the development of mechanical engineering science. The field has continually evolved to incorporate advancements today mechanical engineers are pursuing developments in such areas as composites , mechatronics , and nanotechnology . It also overlaps with aerospace engineering , metallurgical engineering , civil engineering , electrical engineering , manufacturing engineering , chemical engineering , industrial engineering , and other engineering disciplines to varying amounts. Mechanical engineers may also work in the field of biomedical engineering , specifically with biomechanics , transport phenomena , biomechatronics , bionanotechnology , and modelling of biological systems. .mw-parser-output .tmulti .thumbinnerdisplayflexflex-directioncolumn.mw-parser-output .tmulti .trowdisplayflexflex-directionrowclearleftflex-wrapwrapwidth100box-sizingborder-box.mw-parser-output .tmulti .tsinglemargin1pxfloatleft.mw-parser-output .tmulti .theaderclearbothfont-weightboldtext-aligncenteralign-selfcenterbackground-colortransparent width100.mw-parser-output .tmulti .thumbcaptiontext-alignleftbackground-colortransparent.mw-parser-output .tmulti .text-align-lefttext-alignleft.mw-parser-output .tmulti .text-align-righttext-alignright.mw-parser-output .tmulti .text-align-centertext-aligncentermedia all and max-width720px.mw-parser-output .tmulti .thumbinnerwidth100importantbox-sizi ngborder-boxmax-widthnoneimportantalign-itemscenter.mw-parser-output .tmulti .trowjustify-contentcenter.mw-parser-output .tmulti .tsinglefloatnoneimportantmax-width100importantbox-sizingborder-boxtext-aligncenter.mw-parser-output .tmulti .thumbcaptiontext-aligncenter W16 engine of the Bugatti Veyron . Mechanical engineers design engines , power plants , other machines... ... structures , and vehicles of all sizes. Contents 1 History 2 Education 2.1 Coursework 3 Job duties 3.1 License and regulation 3.2 Salaries and workforce statistics 4 Subdisciplines 4.1 Mechanics 4.2 Mechatronics and robotics 4.3 Structural analysis 4.4 Thermodynamics and thermo-science 4.5 Design and drafting 5 Modern tools 6 Areas of research 6.1 Micro electro-mechanical systems MEMS 6.2 Friction stir welding FSW 6.3 Composites 6.4 Mechatronics 6.5 Nanotechnology 6.6 Finite element analysis 6.7 Biomechanics 6.8 Computational fluid dynamics 6.9 Acoustical engineering 7 Related fields 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links History  edit  Main article History of mechanical engineering The application of mechanical engineering can be seen in the archives of various ancient and medieval societies. In ancient Greece , the works of Archimedes 287212 BC influenced mechanics in the Western tradition and Heron of Alexandria c. 1070 AD created the first steam engine  Aeolipile . 3  In China , Zhang Heng 78139 AD improved a water clock and invented a seismometer , and Ma Jun 200265 AD invented a chariot with differential gears. The medieval Chinese horologist and engineer Su Song 10201101 AD incorporated an escapement mechanism into his astronomical clock tower two centuries before escapement devices were found in medieval European clocks. He also invented the worlds first known endless power-transmitting chain drive . 4  During the Islamic Golden Age 7th to 15th century, Muslim inventors made remarkable contributions in the field of mechanical technology. Al-Jazari , who was one of them, wrote his famous Book of Knowledge of Ingenious Mechanical Devices in 1206 and presented many mechanical designs. Al-Jazari is also the first known person to create devices such as the crankshaft and camshaft , which now form the basics of many mechanisms. 5  During the 17th century, important breakthroughs in the foundations of mechanical engineering occurred in England . Sir Isaac Newton formulated Newtons Laws of Motion and developed Calculus , the mathematical basis of physics. Newton was reluctant to publish his works for years, but he was finally persuaded to do so by his colleagues, such as Sir Edmond Halley , much to the benefit of all mankind. Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz is also credited with creating Calculus during this time period.  citation needed  During the early 19th century industrial revolution, machine tools were developed in England, Germany , and Scotland . This allowed mechanical engineering to develop as a separate field within engineering. They brought with them manufacturing machines and the engines to power them. 6  The first British professional society of mechanical engineers was formed in 1847 Institution of Mechanical Engineers , thirty years after the civil engineers formed the first such professional society Institution of Civil Engineers . 7  On the European continent, Johann von Zimmermann 18201901 founded the first factory for grinding machines in Chemnitz , Germany in 1848. In the United States, the American Society of Mechanical Engineers ASME was formed in 1880, becoming the third such professional engineering society, after the American Society of Civil Engineers 1852 and the American Institute of Mining Engineers 1871. 8  The first schools in the United States to offer an engineering education were the United States Military Academy in 1817, an institution now known as Norwich University in 1819, and Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in 1825. Education in mechanical engineering has historically been based on a strong foundation in mathematics and science. 9  Education  edit  Archimedes screw was operated by hand and could efficiently raise water, as the animated red ball demonstrates. Degrees in mechanical engineering are offered at various universities worldwide. Mechanical engineering programs typically take four to five years of study and result in a Bachelor of Engineering B.Eng. or B.E., Bachelor of Science B.Sc. or B.S., Bachelor of Science Engineering B.Sc.Eng., Bachelor of Technology B.Tech., Bachelor of Mechanical Engineering B.M.E., or Bachelor of Applied Science B.A.Sc. degree, in or with emphasis in mechanical engineering. In Spain, Portugal and most of South America, where neither B.S. nor B.Tech. programs have been adopted, the formal name for the degree is Mechanical Engineer, and the course work is based on five or six years of training. In Italy the course work is based on five years of education, and training, but in order to qualify as an Engineer one has to pass a state exam at the end of the course. In Greece, the coursework is based on a five-year curriculum and the requirement of a Diploma Thesis, which upon completion a Diploma is awarded rather than a B.Sc.  citation needed  In the United States, most undergraduate mechanical engineering programs are accredited by the Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology ABET to ensure similar course requirements and standards among universities. The ABET web site lists 302 accredited mechanical engineering programs as of 11 March 2014. 10  Mechanical engineering programs in Canada are accredited by the Canadian Engineering Accreditation Board CEAB, 11  and most other countries offering engineering degrees have similar accreditation societies. In Australia , mechanical engineering degrees are awarded as Bachelor of Engineering Mechanical or similar nomenclature, although there are an increasing number of specialisations. The degree takes four years of full-time study to achieve. To ensure quality in engineering degrees, Engineers Australia accredits engineering degrees awarded by Australian universities in accordance with the global Washington Accord . Before the degree can be awarded, the student must complete at least 3 months of on the job work experience in an engineering firm. 12  Similar systems are also present in South Africa and are overseen by the Engineering Council of South Africa ECSA. In India, to become an engineer, one needs to have an engineering degree like a B.Tech or B.E, have a diploma in engineering, or by completing a course in an engineering trade like fitter from the Industrial Training Institute ITIs to receive a ITI Trade Certificate and also pass the All India Trade Test AITT with an engineering trade conducted by the National Council of Vocational Training NCVT by which one is awarded a National Trade Certificate. A similar system is used in Nepal.  citation needed  Some mechanical engineers go on to pursue a postgraduate degree such as a Master of Engineering , Master of Technology , Master of Science , Master of Engineering Management M.Eng.Mgt. or M.E.M., a Doctor of Philosophy in engineering Eng.D. or Ph.D. or an engineers degree . The masters and engineers degrees may or may not include research . The Doctor of Philosophy includes a significant research component and is often viewed as the entry point to academia . 13  The Engineers degree exists at a few institutions at an intermediate level between the masters degree and the doctorate. Coursework  edit  Standards set by each countrys accreditation society are intended to provide uniformity in fundamental subject material, promote competence among graduating engineers, and to maintain confidence in the engineering profession as a whole. Engineering programs in the U.S., for example, are required by ABET to show that their students can work professionally in both thermal and mechanical systems areas. 14  The specific courses required to graduate, however, may differ from program to program. Universities and Institutes of technology will often combine multiple subjects into a single class or split a subject into multiple classes, depending on the faculty available and the universitys major areas of research. The fundamental subjects of mechanical engineering usually include Mathematics in particular, calculus , differential equations , and linear algebra  Basic physical sciences including physics and chemistry  Statics and dynamics Strength of materials and solid mechanics Materials engineering , Composites Thermodynamics , heat transfer , energy conversion , and HVAC Fuels , combustion , Internal combustion engine Fluid mechanics including fluid statics and fluid dynamics  Mechanism and Machine design including kinematics and dynamics  Instrumentation and measurement Manufacturing engineering , technology, or processes Vibration , control theory and control engineering Hydraulics , and pneumatics Mechatronics , and robotics Engineering design and product design Drafting , computer-aided design CAD and computer-aided manufacturing CAM 15  16  Mechanical engineers are also expected to understand and be able to apply basic concepts from chemistry, physics, tribology , chemical engineering , civil engineering , and electrical engineering . All mechanical engineering programs include multiple semesters of mathematical classes including calculus , and advanced mathematical concepts including differential equations , partial differential equations , linear algebra , abstract algebra , and differential geometry , among others. In addition to the core mechanical engineering curriculum, many mechanical engineering programs offer more specialized programs and classes, such as control systems , robotics , transport and logistics , cryogenics , fuel technology, automotive engineering , biomechanics , vibration , optics and others, if a separate department does not exist for these subjects. 17  Most mechanical engineering programs also require varying amounts of research or community projects to gain practical problem-solving experience. In the United States it is common for mechanical engineering students to complete one or more internships while studying, though this is not typically mandated by the university. Cooperative education is another option. Future work skills 18  research puts demand on study components that feed students creativity and innovation. 19  Job duties  edit  Mechanical engineers research, design, develop, build, and test mechanical and thermal devices, including tools, engines, and machines. Mechanical engineers typically do the following Analyze problems to see how mechanical and thermal devices might help solve the problem. Design or redesign mechanical and thermal devices using analysis and computer-aided design. Develop and test prototypes of devices they design. Analyze the test results and change the design as needed. Oversee the manufacturing process for the device. Mechanical engineers design and oversee the manufacturing of many products ranging from medical devices to new batteries. They also design power-producing machines such as electric generators, internal combustion engines, and steam and gas turbines as well as power-using machines, such as refrigeration and air-conditioning systems. Like other engineers, mechanical engineers use computers to help create and analyze designs, run simulations and test how a machine is likely to work. License and regulation  edit  Engineers may seek license by a state, provincial, or national government. The purpose of this process is to ensure that engineers possess the necessary technical knowledge, real-world experience, and knowledge of the local legal system to practice engineering at a professional level. Once certified, the engineer is given the title of Professional Engineer in the United States, Canada, Japan, South Korea, Bangladesh and South Africa, Chartered Engineer in the United Kingdom, Ireland, India and Zimbabwe, Chartered Professional Engineer in Australia and New Zealand or European Engineer much of the European Union. In the U.S., to become a licensed Professional Engineer PE, an engineer must pass the comprehensive FE Fundamentals of Engineering exam, work a minimum of 4 years as an Engineering Intern EI or Engineer-in-Training EIT , and pass the Principles and Practice or PE Practicing Engineer or Professional Engineer exams. The requirements and steps of this process are set forth by the National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying NCEES, a composed of engineering and land surveying licensing boards representing all U.S. states and territories. In the UK, current graduates require a BEng plus an appropriate masters degree or an integrated MEng degree, a minimum of 4 years post graduate on the job competency development, and a peer reviewed project report in the candidates specialty area in order to become a Chartered Mechanical Engineer CEng, MIMechE through the Institution of Mechanical Engineers . CEng MIMechE can also be obtained via an examination route administered by the City and Guilds of London Institute .  citation needed  In most developed countries, certain engineering tasks, such as the design of bridges, electric power plants, and chemical plants, must be approved by a professional engineer or a chartered engineer . Only a licensed engineer, for instance, may prepare, sign, seal and submit engineering plans and drawings to a public authority for approval, or to seal engineering work for public and private clients. 20  This requirement can be written into state and provincial legislation, such as in the Canadian provinces, for example the Ontario or Quebecs Engineer Act. 21  In other countries, such as Australia, and the UK, no such legislation exists however, practically all certifying bodies maintain a code of ethics independent of legislation, that they expect all members to abide by or risk expulsion. 22  Further information FE Exam , Professional Engineer , Incorporated Engineer , and Washington Accord Salaries and workforce statistics  edit  The total number of engineers employed in the U.S. in 2015 was roughly 1.6 million. Of these, 278,340 were mechanical engineers 17.28, the largest discipline by size. 23  In 2012, the median annual income of mechanical engineers in the U.S. workforce was 80,580. The median income was highest when working for the government 92,030, and lowest in education 57,090. 24  In 2014, the total number of mechanical engineering jobs was projected to grow 5 over the next decade. 25  As of 2009, the average starting salary was 58,800 with a bachelors degree. 26  Subdisciplines  edit  The field of mechanical engineering can be thought of as a collection of many mechanical engineering science disciplines. Several of these subdisciplines which are typically taught at the undergraduate level are listed below, with a brief explanation and the most common application of each. Some of these subdisciplines are unique to mechanical engineering, while others are a co mbination of mechanical engineering and one or more other disciplines. Most work that a mechanical engineer does uses skills and techniques from several of these subdisciplines, as well as specialized subdisciplines. Specialized subdisciplines, as used in this article, are more likely to be the subject of graduate studies or on-the-job training than undergraduate research. Seve ral specialized subdisciplines are discussed in this section. Mechanics  edit  Mohrs circle , a common tool to study stresses in a mechanical element Main article Mechanics Mechanics is, in the most general sense, the study of forces and their effect upon matter . Typically, engineering mechanics is used to analyze and predict the acceleration and deformation both elastic and plastic  of objects under known forces also called loads or stresses . Subdisciplines of mechanics include Statics , the study of non-moving bodies under known loads, how forces affect static bodies Dynamics the study of how forces affect moving bodies. Dynamics includes kinematics about movement, velocity, and acceleration and kinetics about forces and resulting accelerations. Mechanics of materials , the study of how different materials deform under various types of stress Fluid mechanics , the study of how fluids react to forces 27  Kinematics , the study of the motion of bodies objects and systems groups of objects, while ignoring the forces that cause the motion. Kinematics is often used in the design and analysis of mechanisms . Continuum mechanics , a method of applying mechanics that assumes that objects are continuous rather than discrete  Mechanical engineers typically use mechanics in the design or analysis phases of engineering. If the engineering project were the design of a vehicle, statics might be employed to design the frame of the vehicle, in order to evaluate where the stresses will be most intense. Dynamics might be used when designing the cars engine, to evaluate the forces in the pistons and cams as the engine cycles. Mechanics of materials might be used to choose appropriate materials for the frame and engine. Fluid mechanics might be used to design a ventilation system for the vehicle see HVAC , or to design the intake system for the engine. Mechatronics and robotics  edit  Training FMS with learning robot SCORBOT-ER 4u , workbench CNC Mill and CNC Lathe Main articles Mechatronics and Robotics Mechatronics is a combination of mechanics and electronics. It is an interdisciplinary branch of mechanical engineering, electrical engineering and software engineering that is concerned with integrating electrical and mechanical engineering to create hybrid systems. In this way, machines can be automated through the use of electric motors , servo-mechanisms , and other electrical systems in conjunction with special software. A common example of a mechatronics system is a CD-ROM drive. Mechanical systems open and close the drive, spin the CD and move the laser, while an optical system reads the data on the CD and converts it to bits . Integrated software controls the process and communicates the contents of the CD to the computer. Robotics is the application of mechatronics to create robots, which are often used in industry to perform tasks that are dangerous, unpleasant, or repetitive. These robots may be of any shape and size, but all are preprogrammed and interact physically with the world. To create a robot, an engineer typically employs kinematics to determine the robots range of motion and mecha nics to determine the stresses within the robot. Robots are used extensively in industrial engineering . They allow businesses to save money on labor, perform tasks that are either too dangerous or too precise for humans to perform them economically, and to ensure better quality. Many companies employ assembly lines of robots, especially in Automotive Industries and some factories are so robotized that they can run by themselves . Outside the factory, robots have been employed in bomb disposal, space exploration , and many other fields. Robots are also sold for various residential applications, from recreation to domestic applications. Structural analysis  edit  Main articles Structural analysis and Failure analysis Structural analysis is the branch of mechanical engineering and also civil engineering devoted to examining why and how objects fail and to fix the objects and their performance. Structural failures occur in two general modes static failure, and fatigue failure. Static structural failure occurs when, upon being loaded having a force applied the object being analyzed either breaks or is deformed plastically , depending on the criterion for failure. Fatigue failure occurs when an object fails after a number of repeated loading and unloading cycles. Fatigue failure occurs because of imperfections in the object a microscopic crack on the surface of the object, for instance, will grow slightly with each cycle propagation until the crack is large enough to cause ultimate failure . 28  Failure is not simply defined as when a part breaks, however it is defined as when a part does not operate as intended. Some systems, such as the perforated top sections of some plastic bags, are designed to break. If these systems do not break, failure analysis might be employed to determine the cause. Structural analysis is often used by mechanical engineers after a failure has occurred, or when designing to prevent failure. Engineers often use online documents and books such as those published by ASM 29  to aid them in determining the type of failure and possible causes. Once theory is applied to a mechanical design, physical testing is often performed to verify calculated results. Structural analysis may be used in an office when designing parts, in the field to analyze failed parts, or in laboratories where parts might undergo controlled failure tests. Thermodynamics and thermo-science  edit  Main article Thermodynamics Thermodynamics is an applied science used in several branches of engineering, including mechanical and chemical engineering. At its simplest, thermodynamics is the study of energy, its use and transformation through a system . 30  Typically, engineering thermodynamics is concerned with changing energy from one form to another. As an example, automotive engines convert chemical energy  enthalpy  from the fuel into heat, and then into mechanical work that eventually turns the wheels. Thermodynamics principles are used by mechanical engineers in the fields of heat transfer , thermofluids , and energy conversion . Mechanical engineers use thermo-science to design engines and power plants , heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning HVAC systems, heat exchangers , heat sinks , radiators , refrigeration , insulation , and others. 31  Design and drafting  edit  A CAD model of a mechanical double seal Main articles Technical drawing and CNC Drafting or technical drawing is the means by which mechanical engineers design products and create instructions for manufacturing parts. A technical drawing can be a computer model or hand-drawn schematic showing all the dimensions necessary to manufacture a part, as well as assembly notes, a list of required materials, and other pertinent information. 32  A U.S. mechanical engineer or skilled worker who creates technical drawings may be referred to as a drafter or draftsman. Drafting has historically been a two-dimensional process, but computer-aided design CAD programs now allow the designer to create in three dimensions. Instructions for manufacturing a part must be fed to the necessary machinery, either manually, through programmed instructions, or through the use of a computer-aided manufacturing CAM or combined CADCAM program. Optionally, an engineer may also manually manufacture a part using the technical drawings. However, with the advent of computer numerically controlled CNC manufacturing, parts can now be fabricated without the need for constant technician input. Manually manufactured parts generally consist spray coatings , surface finishes, and other processes that cannot economically or practically be done by a machine. Drafting is used in nearly every subdiscipline of mechanical engineering, and by many other branches of engineering and architecture. Three-dimensional models created using CAD software are also commonly used in finite element analysis FEA and computational fluid dynamics CFD. Modern tools  edit  An oblique view of a four-cylinder inline crankshaft with pistons Many mechanical engineering companies, especially those in industrialized nations, have begun to incorporate computer-aided engineering CAE programs into their existing design and analysis processes, including 2D and 3D solid modeling computer-aided design CAD. This method has many benefits, including easier and more exhaustive visualization of products, the ability to create virtual assemblies of parts, and the ease of use in designing mating interfaces and tolerances. Other CAE programs commonly used by mechanical engineers include product lifecycle management PLM tools and analysis tools used to perform complex simulations. Analysis tools may be used to predict product response to expected loads, including fatigue life and manufacturability. These tools include finite element analysis FEA, computational fluid dynamics CFD, and computer-aided manufacturing CAM. Using CAE programs, a mechanical design team can quickly and cheaply iterate the design process to develop a product that better meets cost, performance, and other constraints. No physical prototype need be created until the design nears completion, allowing hundreds or thousands of designs to be evaluated, instead of a relative few. In addition, CAE analysis programs can model complicated physical phenomena which cannot be solved by hand, such as viscoelasticity, complex contact between mating parts, or non-Newtonian flows . As mechanical engineering begins to merge with other disciplines, as seen in mechatronics , multidisciplinary design optimization MDO is being used with other CAE programs to automate and improve the iterative design process. MDO tools wrap around existing CAE processes, allowing product evaluation to continue even after the analyst goes home for the day. They also utilize sophisticated optimization algorithms to more intelligently explore possible designs, often finding better, innovative solutions t o difficult multidisciplinary design problems. Areas of research  edit  Mechanical engineers are constantly pushing the boundaries of what is physically possible in order to produce safer, cheaper, and more efficient machines and mechanical systems. Some technologies at the cutting edge of mechanical engineering are listed below see also exploratory engineering . Micro electro-mechanical systems MEMS  edit  Micron-scale mechanical components such as springs, gears, fluidic and heat transfer devices are fabricated from a variety of substrate materials such as silicon, glass and polymers like SU8 . Examples of MEMS components are the accelerometers that are used as car airbag sensors, modern cell phones, gyroscopes for precise positioning and microfluidic devices used in biomedical applications. Friction stir welding FSW  edit  Main article Friction stir welding Friction stir welding, a new type of welding , was discovered in 1991 by The Welding Institute TWI. The innovative steady state non-fusion welding technique joins materials previously un-weldable, including several aluminum alloys . It plays an important role in the future construction of airplanes, potentially replacing rivets. Current uses of this technology to date include welding the seams of the aluminum main Space Shuttle external tank, Orion Crew Vehicle test article, Boeing Delta II and Delta IV Expendable Launch Vehicles and the SpaceX Falcon 1 rocket, armor plating for amphibious assault ship s, and welding the wings and fuselage panels of the new Eclipse 500 aircraft from Eclipse Aviation among an increasingly growing pool of uses. 33  34  35  Composites  edit  Composite cloth consisting of woven carbon fiber Main article Composite material Composites or composite materials are a combination of materials which provide different physical characteristics than either material separately. Composite material research within mechanical engineering typically focuses on designing and, subsequently, finding applications for stronger or more rigid materials while attempting to reduce weight , susceptibility to corrosion, and other undesirable factors. Carbon fiber reinforced composites, for instance, have been used in such diverse applications as spacecraft and fishing rods. Mechatronics  edit  Mechatronics is the synergistic combination of mechanical engineering, electronic engineering , and software engineering. The discipline of mechatronics began as a way to combine mechanical principles with electrical engineering. Mechatronic concepts are used in the majority of electro-mechanical systems. 36  Typical electro-mechanical sensors used in mechatronics are strain gauges, thermocouples, and pressure transducers. Nanotechnology  edit  Main article Nanotechnology At the smallest scales, mechanical engineering becomes nanotechnologyone speculative goal of which is to create a molecular assembler to build molecules and materials via mechanosynthesis . For now that goal remains within exploratory engineering . Areas of current mechanical engineering research in nanotechnology include nanofilters, 37  nanofilms, 38  and nanostructures, 39  among others. See also Picotechnology Finite element analysis  edit  Main article Finite element analysis Finite Element Analysis is a computational tool used to estimate stress, strain, and deflection of solid bodies. It uses a mesh setup with user-defined sizes to measure physical quantities at a node. The more nodes there are, the higher the precision. 40  This field is not new, as the basis of Finite Element Analysis FEA or Finite Element Method FEM dates back to 1941. But the evolution of computers has made FEAFEM a viable option for analysis of structural problems. Many commercial codes such as NASTRAN , ANSYS , and ABAQUS are widely used in industry for research and the design of components. Some 3D modeling and CAD software packages have added FEA modules. In the recent times, cloud simulation platforms like SimScale are becoming more common. Other techniques such as finite difference method FDM and finite-volume method FVM are employed to solve problems relating heat and mass transfer, fluid flows, fluid surface interaction, etc. Biomechanics  edit  Main article Biomechanics Biomechanics is the application of mechanical principles to biological systems, such as humans , animals , plants , organs , and cells . 41  Biomechanics also aids in creating prosthetic limbs and artificial organs for humans. Biomechanics is closely related to engineering , because it often uses traditional engineering sciences to analyze biological systems. Some simple applications of Newtonian mechanics andor materials sciences can supply correct approximations to the mechanics of many biological systems. In the past decade, reverse engineering of materials found in nature such as bone matter has gained funding in academia. The structure of bone matter is optimized for its purpose of bearing a large amount of compressive stress per unit weight. 42  The goal is to replace crude steel with bio-material for structural design. Over the past decade the Finite element method FEM has also entered the Biomedical sector highlighting further engineering aspects of Biomechanics. FEM has since then established itself as an alternative to in vivo surgical assessment and gained the wide acceptance of academia. The main advantage of Computational Biomechanics lies in its ability to determine the endo-anatomical response of an anatomy, without being subject to ethical restrictions. 43  This has led FE modelling to the point of becoming ubiquitous in several fields of Biomechanics while several projects have even adopted an open source philosophy e.g. BioSpine. Computational fluid dynamics  edit  Main article Computational fluid dynamics Computational fluid dynamics, usually abbreviated as CFD, is a branch of fluid mechanics that uses numerical methods and algorithms to solve and analyze problems that involve fluid flows. Computers are used to perform the calculations required to simulate the interaction of liquids and gases with surfaces defined by boundary conditions. 44  With high-speed supercomputers, better solutions can be achieved. Ongoing research yields software that improves the accuracy and speed of complex simulation scenarios such as turbulent flows. Initial validation of such software is performed using a wind tunnel with the final validation coming in full-scale testing, e.g. flight tests. Acoustical engineering  edit  Main article Acoustical engineering Acoustical engineering is one of many other sub-disciplines of mechanical engineering and is the application of acoustics. Acoustical engineering is the study of Sound and Vibration . These engineers work effectively to reduce noise pollution in mechanical devices and in buildings by soundproofing or removing sources of unwanted noise. The study of acoustics can range from designing a more efficient hearing aid, microphone, headphone, or recording studio to enhancing the sound quality of an orchestra hall. Acoustical engineering also deals with the vibration of different mechanical systems. 45  Related fields  edit  Manufacturing engineering , aerospace engineering and automotive engineering are grouped with mechanical engineering at times. A bachelors degree in these areas will typically have a difference of a few specialized classes. See also  edit  Engineering portal At Wikiversity , you can learn more and teach others about Mechanical engineering at the Department of Mechanical engineering Lists Glossary of mechanical engineering List of historic mechanical engineering landmarks List of inventors List of mechanical engineering topics List of mechanical engineers List of related journals List of mechanical, electrical and electronic equipment manufacturing companies by revenue Associations American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers ASHRAE American Society of Mechanical Engineers ASME Pi Tau Sigma Mechanical Engineering honor society Society of Automotive Engineers SAE Society of Women Engineers SWE Institution of Mechanical Engineers IMechE British Chartered Institution of Building Services Engineers CIBSE British Verein Deutscher Ingenieure VDI Germany Wikibooks Engineering Mechanics Engineering Thermodynamics Engineering Acoustics Fluid Mechanics Heat Transfer Microtechnology Nanotechnology ProEngineer ProE CAD Strength of MaterialsSolid Mechanics References  edit   engineering mechanical engineering . The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition. Retrieved 19 September 2014.  mechanical engineering . Webster dictionary. Retrieved 19 September 2014.  Heron of Alexandria . Encyclopdia Britannica 2010 - Encyclopdia Britannica Online. Accessed 9 May 2010.  Needham, Joseph 1986. Science and Civilization in China Volume 4 . Taipei Caves Books, Ltd.  Al-Jazar. The Book of Knowledge of Ingenious Mechanical Devices Kitb f marifat al-hiyal al-handasiyya . Springer, 1973. .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em ISBN   90-277-0329-9 .  Engineering  Encyclopdia Britannica, accessed 6 May 2008  R.A. Buchanan. The Economic History Review, New Series, Vol. 38, No. 1 Feb. 1985, pp. 4260.  ASME history Archived 23 February 2011 at Wikiwix, accessed 6 May 2008.  The Columbia Encyclopedia, Sixth Edition. 2001, engineering , accessed 6 May 2008  ABET searchable database of accredited engineering programs , Accessed 11 March 2014.  Accredited engineering programs in Canada by the Canadian Council of Professional Engineers Archived 10 May 2007 at the Wayback Machine , Accessed 18 April 2007.  Mechanical Engineering . Retrieved 8 December 2011 .  Types of post-graduate degrees offered at MIT Archived 16 June 2006 at the Wayback Machine - Accessed 19 June 2006.  2008-2009 ABET Criteria Archived 28 February 2008 at the Wayback Machine , p. 15.  University of Tulsa Required ME Courses  Undergraduate Majors and Minors Archived 4 August 2012 at Archive.today . Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Tulsa, 2010. Accessed 17 December 2010.  Harvard Mechanical Engineering Page . Harvard.edu. Accessed 19 June 2006.  Mechanical Engineering courses , MIT. Accessed 14 June 2008.  Archived copy . Archived from the original on 4 November 2011 . Retrieved 5 November 2012 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  CS1 maint archived copy as title  link  . Apollo Research Institute, Future Work Skills 2020, Accessed 5 November 2012.  Archived copy . Archived from the original on 16 November 2012 . Retrieved 5 November 2012 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  CS1 maint archived copy as title  link  Aalto University School of Engineering, Design Factory  Researchers Blog, Accessed 5 November 2012.  Why Get Licensed . National Society of Professional Engineers . Retrieved 6 May 2008 .  Engineers Act . Quebec Statutes and Regulations CanLII . Archived from the original on 5 October 2006 . Retrieved 24 July 2005 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Codes of Ethics and Conduct . Online Ethics Center . Archived from the original on 19 June 2005 . Retrieved 24 July 2005 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   May 2015 National Occupational Employment and Wage Estimates . U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics . Retrieved 3 March 2017 .  Occupational Employment and Wages, 17-2141 Mechanical Engineers . U.S. Bureau of Labor, May 2012. Accessed 15 February 2014.  Mechanical Engineers . U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, December 17, 2015. Accessed 3 March 2017.  201011 Edition, Engineers . Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Outlook Handbook, Accessed 9 May 2010.  Note fluid mechanics can be further split into fluid statics and fluid dynamics, and is itself a subdiscipline of continuum mechanics. The application of fluid mechanics in engineering is called hydraulics and pneumatics .  Chapter 8. Failure . www.virginia.edu . Retrieved 9 September 2018 .  ASM Internationals site many documents, such as the ASM Handbook series Archived 2007-09-01 at the Wayback Machine . ASM International .  Thermodynamics . www.grc.nasa.gov . Retrieved 9 September 2018 .  Applications of Thermodynamics Laws. Carnot, Stirling, Ericsson, Diesel cycles . Brighthub Engineering . 10 June 2009 . Retrieved 9 September 2018 .  SOLIDWORKS 3D CAD . SOLIDWORKS . 27 November 2017 . Retrieved 9 September 2018 .  Advances in Friction Stir Welding for Aerospace Applications PDF . Retrieved 12 August 2017 .  Proposal Number 08-1 A1.02-9322  NASA 2008 SBIR  Military Applications .  What is Mechatronics Technology . www.ecpi.edu . Retrieved 9 September 2018 .  Nilsen, Kyle. 2011 Development of Low Pressure Filter Testing Vessel and Analysis of Electrospun Nanofiber Membranes for Water Treatment  Mechanical Characterization of Aluminium Nanofilms , Microelectronic Engineering, Volume 88, Issue 5, May 2011, pp. 844847.  httpwww.cise.columbia.edunsec Columbia University and National Science Foundation, Accessed 20 June 2012.  Xia, Ting 3 February 2003. Introduction to Finite Element Analysis FEA PDF . UIOWA Engineering . Retrieved 4 September 2018 .  Mechanics of animal movement. doi  10.1016j.cub.2005.08.016 . Cite journal requires journal  help   Dempster, Coleman 15 August 1960. Tensile strength of bone along and across the grain. Journal of Applied Physiology . 16 2 355360. doi  10.1152jappl.1961.16.2.355 . PMID   13721810 .  Tsouknidas, A., Savvakis, S., Asaniotis, Y., Anagnostidis, K., Lontos, A., Michailidis, N. 2013 The effect of kyphoplasty parameters on the dynamic load transfer within the lumbar spine considering the response of a bio-realistic spine segment. Clinical Biomechanics 28 910, pp. 949955.  What is CFD  Computational Fluid Dynamics  SimScale Documentation . www.simscale.com . Retrieved 9 September 2018 .  What is the Job Description of an Acoustic Engineer . learn.org . Further reading  edit  Library resources about Mechanical engineering Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Burstall, Aubrey F. 1965. A History of Mechanical Engineering . The MIT Press. ISBN   978-0-262-52001-0 . Marks Standard Handbook for Mechanical Engineers 11 ed.. McGraw-Hill. 2007. ISBN   978-0-07-142867-5 . Oberg, Erik Franklin D. Jones Holbrook L. Horton Henry H. Ryffel Christopher McCauley 2016. Machinerys Handbook 30th ed.. New York Industrial Press Inc. ISBN   978-0-8311-3091-6 . External links  edit  Wikimedia Commons has media related to Mechanical engineering . Wikiquote has quotations related to Mechanical engineering v t e Engineering Civil Architectural Construction Environmental Earthquake Geotechnical Hydraulic Mining Structural Transportation Mechanical Acoustical Aerospace Automotive Marine Railway Thermal Electrical Computer Control Electromechanics Electronics Microwaves Power Radio Frequency Telecommunications Chemical Biochemical Biological Molecular Petroleum Process Reaction Interdisciplinary Audio Biomedical Engineering mathematics Engineering mechanics Engineering physics Engineering science Fire Industrial Information Materials science Ceramics Metallurgy Polymer Mechatronics Military Nanotechnology Nuclear Optical Photonics Privacy Robotics Sanitary Security Software Systems Glossaries Engineering Aerospace engineering Civil engineering Electrical and electronics engineering Mechanical engineering Structural engineering List of engineering branches CategoryEngineering Engineering portal v t e Glossaries of science and engineering Aerospace engineering Archaeology Architecture Artificial intelligence Astronomy Biology Botany Calculus Chemistry Civil engineering Clinical research Computer science Ecology Economics Electrical and electronics engineering Engineering Entomology Environmental science Genetics Geography Geology Machine vision Mathematics Mechanical engineering Medicine Meteorology Physics Probability and statistics Psychiatry Robotics Speciation Structural engineering v t e Levels of academic degree Undergraduate ISCED level 5 Associate degree Foundation degree Higher National Diploma   Diploma of Higher Education   Certificate of Higher Education ISCED level 6 Bachelors degree Honours degree Postgraduate ISCED level 7 Masters degree Postgraduate diploma   certificate Diplom degree Engineers degree ISCED level 8 Doctorate Candidate of Sciences Other Postdoctoral Higher doctorate Doktor nauk Habilitation Docent Tenure Fellow No dominant classification Laurea Licentiate Magister degree Professional degree Graduate diploma   certificate Higher diploma Specialist degree   diploma Terminal degree Unearned Honorary degree Ad eundem degree Authority control BNE  XX534253 BNF  cb119403951 data GND  4037790-8 LCCN  sh85082757 NARA  10639809 NDL  00565745 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleMechanical_engineering oldid913749838  Categories  Mechanical engineering Engineering disciplines Mechanical designers Hidden categories Webarchive template other archives Webarchive template wayback links Webarchive template archiveis links CS1 errors deprecated parameters CS1 maint archived copy as title CS1 errors missing periodical Articles with short description Use dmy dates from October 2012 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2015 Commons category link is on Wikidata Wikipedia articles with BNE identifiers Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers Wikipedia articles with NARA identifiers Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers