Software Magazine From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search This article needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources   Software Magazine     news    newspapers    books    scholar    JSTOR  January 2018   Learn how and when to remove this template message  Software Magazine is a software and Information technology magazine. It is owned and published by Rockport Custom Publishing, based in Beverly, Massachusetts , on a monthly basis. 1  2  Software 500 survey can be used to gauge the value of the commercial software industry . The survey consists of data of the top 500 software companies. 2  References  edit   Trade publications . Rockport Custom Publishing . Retrieved 25 November 2015 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  a b EPAM Named to Software Magazines 32nd Annual Software 500 . epam . 10 September 2014 . Retrieved 25 November 2015 . External links  edit  official website This computer magazine or journal-related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it . v t e See tips for writing articles about magazines . Further suggestions might be found on the articles talk page . Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSoftware_Magazine oldid823248099  Categories  American computer magazines American monthly magazines Magazines published in Massachusetts Computer magazine stubs Hidden categories Articles needing additional references from January 2018 All articles needing additional references Magazines with year of establishment missing All stub articles