Bachelor of Software Engineering From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search A Bachelor of Software Engineering  B.SE.  is an undergraduate academic degree  bachelors degree  awarded for completing a program of study in the field of software development for computers in information technology .  Software Engineering is the systematic development and application of techniques which lead to the creation of correct and reliable computer software. 1  Contents 1 A threefour year degree 2 General skills acquired through a Bachelors degree course in Software Engineering 3 Graduate prospects 4 International variations 4.1 PAKISTAN and Nepal etc 5 References 6 External links A threefour year degree  edit  This section needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources   Bachelor of Software Engineering     news    newspapers    books    scholar    JSTOR  March 2009   Learn how and when to remove this template message  The course syllabus of software engineering has been heavily debated and still is. Institutions will often offer slightly differing course structures, many may have a stronger focus on mathematical foundations for example. Students of a four-year software engineering course will typically have a similar first year of study as students of Computer Science , including classes such as Computer Programming Program design Computer Systems analysis Fundamentals of Hardware Networking Computer Architecture Professional Awareness Mathematics for Computing Introduction to Databases Academic skills for computing The first year is designed to build up a solid base of knowledge essential to any computing degree. The following years offer students more flexibility, allowing them to choose their classes from a range of related subjects. It is only in the later years that the course really differs from other Computer Science degrees. Students usually take a work placement between years 3 an d 4, greatly expanding their skills and allowing them an insight into the current industry. In following years a software engineering student will often have a much stronger focus on Software systems and data management. The inclusion of human factors in a software engineering degree has been heavily debated, arguing that products of software engineers often are too difficult to use by consumers. 2  Sample B.S. in Software Engineering Degree Information from the University of Virginia - Wise Core SWE Requirements 3  Introduction to Software Engineering Software Requirements  Modeling Software Design  Construction Software Testing, Verification, and Validation Software Quality Assurance Software Project Management Software Configuration Management CS Requirements 3  Fundamentals of Programming Data Structures Introduction to Algorithms Operating Systems Computer Architecture Programming Languages Human - Computer Interaction Discrete Mathematics Database Designing Math Requirements 3  Probability  Statistics Calculus I Calculus II Calculus III Linear Algebra Boolean Algebra General skills acquired through a Bachelors degree course in Software Engineering  edit  Employers generally seek applicants with strong programming, systems analysis and business skills. A large difference exists between the software engineering skills taught at a typical university or college and the skills that are desired of a software engineer by a typical software development organization. At the heart of this difference seems to be the way software engineering is typically introduced to students general theory is presented in a series of lectures and pu t into limited practice in an associated class project. 4  Graduate prospects  edit  Graduate prospects are projected to be excellent with the amount of software engineers in the industry estimated to rise by roughly 38 from 2006 to 2016, with total real wage in the industry increasing by an estimated 38.2. 5  International variations  edit  PAKISTAN and Nepal etc  edit  In Pakistan and Nepal , Bachelor of Engineering in Software Engineering BE Software is an 8-semester course of study. 6  This degree is provided by Virtual University of Pakistan and Pokhara University Nepal . The degree is awarded to those who successfully complete an eight-semester program. References  edit   1 Archived 2009-08-02 at the Wayback Machine Software engineering description at University of Strathclyde , Glasgow , Scotland .  2 A proposed 4-year software engineering curriculum, Randall W. Jensen, Hughes Aircraft Company, Charles C. Tonies, Hughes Aircraft Company, William I. Fletcher, Utah State University  a b c UVa-Wises Software Engineering Degree Information . Department of Mathematics  Computer Science at The University of Virginia College at Wise . Retrieved 2010-04-01 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  3 Teaching Software Engineering through Simulation, Emily Oh and Andr van der Hoek Institute for Software Research University of California, Irvine  4  permanent dead link  Software engineering prospects over a decade from 2006 to 2016  Bachelor of Software Engineering . timeandupdate.com . Retrieved 2018-01-08 . External links  edit  U.S. Department of Educations list of recognized institutions offering a degree program in Computer Software Engineering Summary of Software Engineering and the roles of software engineers in the industry Bachelor of Science in Software Engineering - Information and Communication Technology Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleBachelor_of_Software_Engineering oldid913723981  Categories  Bachelors degrees Hidden categories Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from October 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles needing additional references from March 2009 All articles needing additional references