Philosophy of artificial intelligence From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search See also Ethics of artificial intelligence Artificial intelligence has close connections with philosophy because both share several concepts and these include intelligence, action, consciousness , epistemology , and even free will . 1  Furthermore, the technology is concerned with the creation of artificial animals or artificial people or, at least, artificial creatures so the discipline is of considerable interest to philosophers. 2  These factors contributed to the emergence of the philosophy of artificial intelligence. Some scholars argue that the AI communitys dismissal of philosophy is detrimental.  citation needed  The philosophy of artificial intelligence attempts to answer such questions as follows 3  Can a machine act intelligently Can it solve any problem that a person would solve by thinking Are human intelligence and machine intelligence the same Is the human brain essentially a computer Can a machine have a mind , mental states, and consciousness in the same way that a human being can Can it feel how things are  Questions like these reflect the divergent interests of AI researchers , linguists , cognitive scientists and philosophers respectively. The scientific answers to these questions depend on the definition of intelligence and consciousness and exactly which machines are under discussion. Important propositions in the philosophy of AI include Turings polite convention  If a machine behaves as intelligently as a human being, then it is as intelligent as a human being. 4  The Dartmouth proposal  Every aspect of learning or any other feature of intelligence can be so precisely described that a machine can be made to simulate it. 5  Newell and Simon s physical symbol system hypothesis A physical symbol system has the necessary and sufficient means of general intelligent action. 6  Searle s strong AI hypothesis  The appropriately programmed computer with the right inputs and outputs would thereby have a mind in exactly the same sense human beings have minds. 7  Hobbes  mechanism For reason ... is nothing but reckoning, that is adding and subtracting, of the consequences of general names agreed upon for the marking and signifying of our thoughts... 8  Contents 1 Can a machine display general intelligence 1.1 Intelligence 1.1.1 Turing test 1.1.2 Intelligent agent definition 1.2 Arguments that a machine can display general intelligence 1.2.1 The brain can be simulated 1.2.2 Human thinking is symbol processing 1.2.3 Arguments against symbol processing 1.2.3.1 Gdelian anti-mechanist arguments 1.2.3.2 Dreyfus the primacy of implicit skills 2 Can a machine have a mind, consciousness, and mental states 2.1 Consciousness, minds, mental states, meaning 2.2 Arguments that a computer cannot have a mind and mental states 2.2.1 Searles Chinese room 2.2.2 Related arguments Leibniz mill, Daviss telephone exchange, Blocks Chinese nation and Blockhead 2.2.3 Responses to the Chinese room 3 Is thinking a kind of computation 4 Other related questions 4.1 Can a machine have emotions 4.2 Can a machine be self-aware 4.3 Can a machine be original or creative 4.4 Can a machine be benevolent or hostile 4.5 Can a machine have a soul 5 Views on the role of philosophy 6 Bibliography  Conferences 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References Can a machine display general intelligence  edit  Is it possible to create a machine that can solve all the problems humans solve using their intelligence This question defines the scope of what machines will be able to do in the future and guides the direction of AI research. It only concerns the behavior of machines and ignores the issues of interest to psychologists , cognitive scientists and philosophers  to answer this question, it does not matter whether a machine is really thinking as a person thinks or is just acting like it is thinking. 9  The basic position of most AI researchers is summed up in this statement, which appeared in the proposal for the Dartmouth workshop of 1956 Every aspect of learning or any other feature of intelligence can be so precisely described that a machine can be made to simulate it. 5  Arguments against the basic premise must show that building a working AI system is impossible, because there is some practical limit to the abilities of computers or that there is some special quality of the human mind that is necessary for thinking and yet cannot be duplicated by a machine or by the methods of current AI research. Arguments in favor of the basic premise mus t show that such a system is possible. The first step to answering the question is to clearly define intelligence. Intelligence  edit  The standard interpretation of the Turing test. 10  Turing test  edit  Main article Turing test Alan Turing 11  reduced the problem of defining intelligence to a simple question about conversation. He suggests that if a machine can answer any question put to it, using the same words that an ordinary person would, then we may call that machine intelligent. A modern version of his experimental design would use an online chat room , where one of the participants is a real person and one of the participants is a computer program. The program passes the test if no one can tell which of the two participants is human. 4  Turing notes that no one except philosophers ever asks the question can people think He writes instead of arguing continually over this point, it is usual to have a polite convention that everyone thinks. 12  Turings test extends this polite convention to machines If a machine acts as intelligently as a human being, then it is as intelligent as a human being. One criticism of the Turing test is that it is explicitly anthropomorphic  citation needed  . If our ultimate goal is to create machines that are more intelligent than people, why should we insist that our machines must closely resemble people  This quote needs a citation  Russell and Norvig write that aeronautical engineering texts do not define the goal of their field as making machines that fly so exactly like pigeons that they can fool other pigeons. 13  Intelligent agent definition  edit  Simple reflex agent Recent A.I. research defines intelligence in terms of intelligent agents . An agent is something which perceives and acts in an environment. A performance measure defines what counts as success for the agent. 14  If an agent acts so as to maximize the expected value of a performance measure based on past experience and knowledge then it is intelligent. 15  Definitions like this one try to capture the essence of intelligence. They have the advantage that, unlike the Turing test, they do not also test for human traits that we  who  may not want to consider intelligent, like the ability to be insulted or the temptation to lie  dubious  discuss  . They have the disadvantage that they fail to make the commonsense  when defined as  differentiation between things that think and things that do not. By this definition, even a thermostat has a rudimentary intelligence. 16  Arguments that a machine can display general intelligence  edit  The brain can be simulated  edit  Main article Artificial brain An MRI scan of a normal adult human brain Hubert Dreyfus describes this argument as claiming that if the nervous system obeys the laws of physics and chemistry, which we have every reason to suppose it does, then .... we ... ought to be able to reproduce the behavior of the nervous system with some physical device. 17  This argument, first introduced as early as 1943 18  and vividly described by Hans Moravec in 1988, 19  is now associated with futurist Ray Kurzweil , who estimates that computer power will be sufficient for a complete brain simulation by the year 2029. 20  A non-real-time simulation of a thalamocortical model that has the size of the human brain 10 11 neurons was performed in 2005 21  and it took 50 days to simulate 1 second of brain dynamics on a cluster of 27 processors. Few  quantify  disagree that a brain simulation is possible in theory,  citation needed   according to whom  even critics of AI such as Hubert Dreyfus and John Searle. 22  However, Searle points out that, in principle, anything can be simulated by a computer thus, bringing the definition to its breaking point leads to the conclusion that any process at all can technically be considered computation. What we wanted to know is what distinguishes the mind from thermostats and livers, he writes. 23  Thus, merely mimicking the functioning of a brain would in itself be an admission of ignorance regarding intelligence and the nature of the mind  citation needed  . Human thinking is symbol processing  edit  Main article Physical symbol system In 1963, Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon proposed that symbol manipulation was the essence of both human and machine intelligence. They wrote A physical symbol system has the necessary and sufficient means of general intelligent action. 6  This claim is very strong it implies both that human thinking is a kind of symbol manipulation because a symbol system is necessary for intelligence and that machines can be intelligent because a symbol system is sufficient for intelligence. 24  Another version of this position was described by philosopher Hubert Dreyfus, who called it the psychological assumption The mind can be viewed as a device operating on bits of information according to formal rules. 25  A distinction is usually made  by whom  between the kind of high level symbols that directly correspond with objects in the world, such as dog  and tail  and the more complex symbols that are present in a machine like a neural network . Early research into AI, called good old fashioned artificial intelligence  GOFAI  by John Haugeland , focused on these kind of high level symbols. 26  Arguments against symbol processing  edit  These arguments show that human thinking does not consist solely of high level symbol manipulation. They do not show that artificial intelligence is impossible, only that more than symbol processing is required. Gdelian anti-mechanist arguments  edit  Main article Mechanism philosophy Gdelian arguments In 1931, Kurt Gdel proved with an incompleteness theorem that it is always possible to construct a Gdel statement  that a given consistent formal system of logic such as a high-level symbol manipulation program could not prove. Despite being a true statement, the constructed Gdel statement is unprovable in the given system. The truth of the constructed Gdel statement is contingent on the consistency of the given system applying the same process to a subtly inconsistent system will appear to succeed, but will actually yie ld a false Gdel statement instead.  citation needed  More speculatively, Gdel conjectured that the human mind can correctly eventually determine the truth or falsity of any well-grounded mathematical statement including any possible Gdel statement, and that therefore the human minds power is not reducible to a mechanism . 27  Philosopher John Lucas since 1961 and Roger Penrose since 1989 have championed this philosophical anti-mechanist argument. 28  Gdelian anti-mechanist arguments tend to rely on the innocuous-seeming claim that a system of human mathematicians or some idealization of human mathematicians is both consistent completely free of error and believes fully in its own consistency and can make all logical inferences that follow from its own consistency, including belief in its Gdel statement  citation needed  . This is provably impossible for a Turing machine  clarification needed  and, by an informal extension, any known type of mechanical computer to do therefore, the Gdelian concludes that human reasoning is too powerful to be captured in a machine  dubious  discuss  . However, the modern consensus in the scientific and mathematical community is that actual human reasoning is inconsistent that any consistent idealized version H of human reasoning would logically be forced to adopt a healthy but counter-intuitive open-minded skepticism about the consistency of H otherwise H is provably inconsistent and that Gdels theorems do not lead to any valid argument that humans have mathematical reasoning capabilities beyond what a machine could ever duplicate. 29  30  31  This consensus that Gdelian anti-mechanist arguments are doomed to failure is laid out strongly in Artificial Intelligence   any attempt to utilize Gdels incompleteness results to attack the computationalist thesis is bound to be illegitimate, since these results are quite consistent with the computationalist thesis. 32  More pragmatically, Russell and Norvig note that Gdels argument only applies to what can theoretically be proved, given an infinite amount of memory and time. In practice, real machines including humans have finite resources and will have difficulty proving many theorems. It is not necessary to prove everything in order to be intelligent  when defined as  . 33  Less formally, Douglas Hofstadter , in his Pulitzer prize winning book Gdel, Escher, Bach An Eternal Golden Braid , states that these Gdel-statements always refer to the system itself, drawing an analogy to the way the Epimenides paradox uses statements that refer to themselves, such as this statement is false or I am lying. 34  But, of course, the Epimenides paradox applies to anything that makes statements, whether they are machines or humans, even Lucas himself. Consider Lucas cant assert the truth of this statement. 35  This statement is true but cannot be asserted by Lucas. This shows that Lucas himself is subject to the same limits that he describes for machines, as are all people, and so Lucas s argument is pointless. 36  After concluding that human reasoning is non-computable, Penrose went on to controversially speculate that some kind of hypothetical non-computable processes involving the collapse of quantum mechanical states give humans a special advantage over existing computers. Existing quantum computers are only capable of reducing the complexity of Turing computable tasks and are still restricted to tasks within the scope of Turing machines.  citation needed   clarification needed  . By Penrose and Lucass arguments, existing quantum computers are not sufficient  citation needed   clarification needed   why  , so Penrose seeks for some other process involving new physics, for instance quantum gravity which might manifest new physics at the scale of the Planck mass via spontaneous quantum collapse of the wave function. These states, he suggested, occur both within neurons and also spanning more than one neuron. 37  However, other scientists point out that there is no plausible organic mechanism in the brain for harnessing any sort of quantum computation, and furthermore that the timescale of quantum decoherence seems too fast to influence neuron firing. 38  Dreyfus the primacy of implicit skills  edit  Main article Dreyfus critique of artificial intelligence Hubert Dreyfus argued that human intelligence and expertise depended primarily on implicit skill rather than explicit symbolic manipulation, and argued that these skills would never be captured in formal rules. 39  Dreyfus s argument had been anticipated by Turing in his 1950 paper Computing machinery and intelligence , where he had classified this as the argument from the informality of behavior. 40  Turing argued in response that, just because we do not know the rules that govern a complex behavior, this does not mean that no such rules exist. He wrote we cannot so easily convince ourselves of the absence of complete laws of behaviour ... The only way we know of for finding such laws is scientific observation, and we certainly know of no circumstances under which we cou ld say, We have searched enough. There are no such laws. 41  Russell and Norvig point out that, in the years since Dreyfus published his critique, progress has been made towards discovering the rules that govern unconscious reasoning. 42  The situated movement in robotics research attempts to capture our unconscious skills at perception and attention. 43  Computational intelligence paradigms, such as neural nets , evolutionary algorithms and so on are mostly directed at simulated unconscious reasoning and learning. Statistical approaches to AI can make predictions which approach the accuracy of human intuitive guesses. Research into commonsense knowledge has focused on reproducing the background or context of knowledge. In fact, AI research in general has moved away from high level symbol manipulation or  GOFAI , towards new models that are intended to capture more of our unconscious reasoning  according to whom  . Historian and AI researcher Daniel Crevier wrote that time has proven the accuracy and perceptiveness of some of Dreyfuss comments. Had he formulated them less aggressively, constructive actions they suggested might have been taken much earlier. 44  Can a machine have a mind, consciousness, and mental states  edit  This is a philosophical question, related to the problem of other minds and the hard problem of consciousness . The question revolves around a position defined by John Searle as strong AI A physical symbol system can have a mind and mental states. 7  Searle distinguished this position from what he called weak AI A physical symbol system can act intelligently. 7  Searle introduced the terms to isolate strong AI from weak AI so he could focus on what he thought was the more interesting and debatable issue. He argued that even if we assume that we had a computer program that acted exactly like a human mind, there would still be a difficult philosophical question that needed to be answered. 7  Neither of Searles two positions are of great concern to AI research, since they do not directly answer the question can a machine display general intelligence unless it can also be shown that consciousness is necessary for intelligence. Turing wrote I do not wish to give the impression that I think there is no mystery about consciousness but I do not think these mysteries necessarily need to be solved before we can answer the question of whether machines can think. 45  Russell and Norvig agree Most AI researchers take the weak AI hypothesis for granted, and dont care about the strong AI hypothesis. 46  There are a few researchers who believe that consciousness is an essential element in intelligence, such as Igor Aleksander , Stan Franklin , Ron Sun , and Pentti Haikonen , although their definition of consciousness strays very close to intelligence. See artificial consciousness . Before we can answer this question, we must be clear what we mean by minds, mental states and consciousness. Consciousness, minds, mental states, meaning  edit  The words  mind  and  consciousness  are used by different communities in different ways. Some new age thinkers, for example, use the word consciousness to describe something similar to Bergson s  lan vital  an invisible, energetic fluid that permeates life and especially the mind. Science fiction writers use the word to describe some essential property that makes us human a machine or alien that is conscious will be presented as a fully human character, with intelligence, desires, will, insight, pride and so on. Science fiction writers also use the words sentience, sapience, self-awareness or ghost - as in the Ghost in the Shell manga and anime series - to describe this essential human property. For others  who  , the words mind or consciousness are used as a kind of secular synonym for the soul . For philosophers , neuroscientists and cognitive scientists , the words are used in a way that is both more precise and more mundane they refer to the familiar, everyday experience of having a thought in your head, like a perception, a dream, an intention or a plan, and to the way we know something, or mean something or understand something  citation needed  . Its not hard to give a commonsense definition of consciousness observes philosopher John Searle. 47  What is mysterious and fascinating is not so much what it is but how it is how does a lump of fatty tissue and electricity give rise to this familiar experience of perceiving, meaning or thinking Philosophers call this the hard problem of consciousness . It is the latest version of a classic problem in the philosophy of mind called the  mind-body problem . 48  A related problem is the problem of meaning or understanding which philosophers call  intentionality  what is the connection between our thoughts and what we are thinking about i.e. objects and situations out in the world A third issue is the problem of experience or  phenomenology  If two people see the same thing, do they have the same experience Or are there things inside their head called  qualia  that can be different from person to person 49  Neurobiologists believe all these problems will be solved as we begin to identify the neural correlates of consciousness  the actual relationship between the machinery in our heads and its collective properties such as the mind, experience and understanding. Some of the harshest critics of artificial intelligence agree that the brain is just a machine, and that consciousness and intelligence are the result of physical processes in the brain. 50  The difficult philosophical question is this can a computer program, running on a digital machine that shuffles the binary digits of zero and one, duplicate the ability of the neurons to create minds, with mental states like understanding or perceiving, and ultimately, the experience of consciousness  Arguments that a computer cannot have a mind and mental states  edit  Searles Chinese room  edit  Main article Chinese room John Searle asks us to consider a thought experiment  suppose we have written a computer program that passes the Turing test and demonstrates general intelligent action. Suppose, specifically that the program can converse in fluent Chinese. Write the program on 3x5 cards and give them to an ordinary person who does not speak Chinese. Lock the person into a room and have him follow the instructions on the cards. He will copy ou t Chinese characters and pass them in and out of the room through a slot. From the outside, it will appear that the Chinese room contains a fully intelligent person who speaks Chinese. The question is this is there anyone or anything in the room that understands Chinese That is, is there anything that has the mental state of understanding , or which has conscious awareness of what is being discussed in Chinese The man is clearly not aware. The room cannot be aware. The cards certainly arent aware. Searle concludes that the Chinese room , or any other physical symbol system, cannot have a mind. 51  Searle goes on to argue that actual mental states and consciousness require yet to be described actual physical-chemical properties of actual human brains. 52  He argues there are special causal properties of brains and neurons that gives rise to minds  in his words brains cause minds. 53  Related arguments Leibniz mill, Daviss telephone exchange, Blocks Chinese nation and Blockhead  edit  Gottfried Leibniz made essentially the same argument as Searle in 1714, using the thought experiment of expanding the brain until it was the size of a mill . 54  In 1974, Lawrence Davis imagined duplicating the brain using telephone lines and offices staffed by people, and in 1978 Ned Block envisioned the entire population of China involved in such a brain simulation. This thought experiment is called the Chinese Nation or the Chinese Gym. 55  Ned Block also proposed his Blockhead argument , which is a version of the Chinese room in which the program has been re-factored into a simple set of rules of the form see this, do that, removing all mystery from the program. Responses to the Chinese room  edit  Responses to the Chinese room emphasize several different points. The systems reply and the virtual mind reply  56  This reply argues that the system , including the man, the program, the room, and the cards, is what understands Chinese. Searle claims that the man in the room is the only thing which could possibly have a mind or understand, but others disagree, arguing that it is possible for there to be two minds in the same physical place, similar to the way a computer can simultaneously be two machines at once one physical like a Macintosh  and one  virtual  like a word processor . Speed, power and complexity replies  57  Several critics point out that the man in the room would probably take millions of years to respond to a simple question, and would require filing cabinets of astronomical proportions. This brings the clarity of Searles intuition into doubt. Robot reply  58  To truly understand, some believe the Chinese Room needs eyes and hands. Hans Moravec writes If we could graft a robot to a reasoning program, we wouldnt need a person to provide the meaning anymore it would come from the physical world. 59  Brain simulator reply  60  What if the program simulates the sequence of nerve firings at the synapses of an actual brain of an actual Chinese speaker The man in the room would be simulating an actual brain. This is a variation on the systems reply that appears more plausible because the system now clearly operates like a human brain, which strengthens the intuition that there is something besides the man in the room that could understand Chinese. Other minds reply and the epiphenomena reply  61  Several people have noted that Searles argument is just a version of the problem of other minds , applied to machines. Since it is difficult to decide if people are actually thinking, we should not be surprised that it is difficult to answer the same question about machines. A related question is whether consciousness as Searle understands it exists. Searle argues that the experience of consciousness cant be detected by examining the behavior of a machine, a human being or any other animal. Daniel Dennett points out that natural selection cannot preserve a feature of an animal that has no effect on the behavior of the animal, and thus consciousness as Searle understands it cant be produced by natural selection. Therefore either natural selection did not produce consciousness, or strong AI is correct in that consciousness can be detected by suitably designed Turing test. Is thinking a kind of computation  edit  Main article computational theory of mind The computational theory of mind or  computationalism  claims that the relationship between mind and brain is similar if not identical to the relationship between a running program and a computer. The idea has philosophical roots in Hobbes who claimed reasoning was nothing more than reckoning, Leibniz who attempted to create a logical calculus of all human ideas, Hume who thought perception could be reduced to atomic impressions and even Kant who analyzed all experience as controlled by formal rules. 62  The latest version is associated with philosophers Hilary Putnam and Jerry Fodor . 63  This question bears on our earlier questions if the human brain is a kind of computer then computers can be both intelligent and conscious, answering both the practical and philosophical questions of AI. In terms of the practical question of AI Can a machine display general intelligence, some versions of computationalism make the claim that as Hobbes wrote Reasoning is nothing but reckoning 8  In other words, our intelligence derives from a form of calculation , similar to arithmetic . This is the physical symbol system hypothesis discussed above, and it implies that artificial intelligence is possible. In terms of the philosophical question of AI Can a machine have mind, mental states and consciousness, most versions of computationalism claim that as Stevan Harnad characterizes it Mental states are just implementations of the right computer programs 64  This is John Searles strong AI discussed above, and it is the real target of the Chinese room argument according to Harnad . 64  Other related questions  edit  Alan Turing noted that there are many arguments of the form a machine will never do X, where X can be many things, such as Be kind, resourceful, beautiful, friendly, have initiative, have a sense of humor, tell right from wrong, make mistakes, fall in love, enjoy strawberries and cream, make someone fall in love with it, learn from experience, use words properly, be the subject of its own thought, have as much diversity of behaviour as a man, do something really new. 65  Turing argues that these objections are often based on naive assumptions about the versatility of machines or are disguised forms of the argument from consciousness. Writing a program that exhibits one of these behaviors will not make much of an impression. 65  All of these arguments are tangential to the basic premise of AI, unless it can be shown that one of these traits is essential for general intelligence. Can a machine have emotions  edit  If emotions are defined only in terms of their effect on behavior or on how they function inside an organism, then emotions can be viewed as a mechanism that an intelligent agent uses to maximize the utility of its actions. Given this definition of emotion, Hans Moravec believes that robots in general will be quite emotional about being nice people. 66  Fear is a source of urgency. Empathy is a necessary component of good human computer interaction . He says robots will try to please you in an apparently selfless manner because it will get a thrill out of this positive reinforcement. You can interpret this as a kind of love. 66  Daniel Crevier writes Moravecs point is that emotions are just devices for channeling behavior in a direction beneficial to the survival of ones species. 67  However, emotions can also be defined in terms of their subjective quality, of what it feels like to have an emotion. The question of whether the machine actually feels an emotion, or whether it merely acts as if it is feeling an emotion is the philosophical question, can a machine be conscious in another form. 45  Can a machine be self-aware  edit  Self awareness, as noted above, is sometimes used by science fiction writers as a name for the essential human property that makes a character fully human. Turing strips away all other properties of human beings and reduces the question to can a machine be the subject of its own thought Can it think about itself  Viewed in this way, a program can be written that can report on its own internal states, such as a debugger . 65  Though arguably self-awareness often presumes a bit more capability a machine that can ascribe meaning in some way to not only its own state but in general postulating questions without solid answers the contextual nature of its existence now how it compares to past states or plans for the future, the limits and value of its work product, how it perceives its performance t o be valued-by or compared to others. Can a machine be original or creative  edit  Turing reduces this to the question of whether a machine can take us by surprise and argues that this is obviously true, as any programmer can attest. 68  He notes that, with enough storage capacity, a computer can behave in an astronomical number of different ways. 69  It must be possible, even trivial, for a computer that can represent ideas to combine them in new ways.  Douglas Lenat s Automated Mathematician , as one example, combined ideas to discover new mathematical truths. Kaplan and Haenlein suggest that machines can display scientific creativity, while it seems likely that humans will have the upper hand where artistic creativity is concerned. 70  In 2009, scientists at Aberystwyth University in Wales and the U.Ks University of Cambridge designed a robot called Adam that they believe to be the first machine to independently come up with new scientific findings. 71  Also in 2009, researchers at Cornell developed Eureqa , a computer program that extrapolates formulas to fit the data inputted, such as finding the laws of motion from a pendulums motion. Can a machine be benevolent or hostile  edit  Main article ethics of artificial intelligence This question like many others in the philosophy of artificial intelligence can be presented in two forms. Hostility can be defined in terms function or behavior , in which case hostile becomes synonymous with dangerous. Or it can be defined in terms of intent can a machine deliberately set out to do harm The latter is the question can a machine have conscious states such as intentions  in another form. 45  The question of whether highly intelligent and completely autonomous machines would be dangerous has been examined in detail by futurists such as the Singularity Institute . The obvious element of drama has also made the subject popular in science fiction , which has considered many differently possible scenarios where intelligent machines pose a threat to mankind. One issue is that machines may acquire the autonomy and intelligence required to be dangerous very quickly. Vernor Vinge has suggested that over just a few years, computers will suddenly become thousands or millions of times more intelligent than humans. He calls this  the Singularity . 72  He suggests that it may be somewhat or possibly very dangerous for humans. 73  This is discussed by a philosophy called Singularitarianism . In 2009, academics and technical experts attended a conference to discuss the potential impact of robots and computers and the impact of the hypothetical possibility that they could become self-sufficient and able to make their own decisions. They discussed the possibility and the extent to which computers and robots might be able to acquire any level of autonomy, and to what d egree they could use such abilities to possibly pose any threat or hazard. They noted that some machines have acquired various forms of semi-autonomy, including being able to find power sources on their own and being able to independently choose targets to attack with weapons. They also noted that some computer viruses can evade elimination and have achieved cockroach intellig ence. They noted that self-awareness as depicted in science-fiction is probably unlikely, but that there were other potential hazards and pitfalls. 72  Some experts and academics have questioned the use of robots for military combat, especially when such robots are given some degree of autonomous functions. 74  The US Navy has funded a report which indicates that as military robots become more complex, there should be greater attention to implications of their ability to make autonomous decisions. 75  76  The President of the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence has commissioned a study to look at this issue. 77  They point to programs like the Language Acquisition Device which can emulate human interaction. Some have suggested a need to build  Friendly AI , meaning that the advances which are already occurring with AI should also include an effort to make AI intrinsically friendly and humane. 78  Can a machine have a soul  edit  Finally, those who believe in the existence of a soul may argue that Thinking is a function of mans immortal soul. Alan Turing called this the theological objection. He writes In attempting to construct such machines we should not be irreverently usurping His power of creating souls, any more than we are in the procreation of children rather we are, in either case, instruments of His will providing mansions for the souls that He creates. 79  Views on the role of philosophy  edit  Some scholars argue that the AI communitys dismissal of philosophy is detrimental. In the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , some philosophers argue that the role of philosophy in AI is underappreciated. 2  Physicist David Deutsch argues that without an understanding of philosophy or its concepts, AI development would suffer from a lack of progress. 80  Bibliography  Conferences  edit  The main bibliography on the subject, with several sub-sections, is on PhilPapers The main conference series on the issue is Philosophy and Theory of AI PT-AI, run by Vincent C. Mller See also  edit  Philosophy portal Psychology portal Science portal AI takeover Artificial brain Artificial consciousness Artificial intelligence Brain other matters section Chatterbot Chinese room Computational theory of mind Computing Machinery and Intelligence Dreyfus critique of artificial intelligence Existential risk from advanced artificial intelligence Functionalism Multi-agent system Philosophy of computer science Philosophy of information Philosophy of mind Physical symbol system Simulated reality Superintelligence Paths, Dangers, Strategies Synthetic intelligence Notes  edit   McCarthy, John. The Philosophy of AI and the AI of Philosophy . jmc.stanford.edu . Retrieved 2018-09-18 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  a b Bringsjord, Selmer Govindarajulu, Naveen Sundar 2018, Zalta, Edward N. ed., Artificial Intelligence , The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Fall 2018 ed., Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2018-09-18  Russell  Norvig 2003 , p.  947 define the philosophy of AI as consisting of the first two questions, and the additional question of the ethics of artificial intelligence . Fearn 2007 , p.  55 writes In the current literature, philosophy has two chief roles to determine whether or not such machines would be conscious, and, second, to predict whether or not such machines are possible. The last question bears on the first two.  a b This is a paraphrase of the essential point of the Turing test . Turing 1950 , Haugeland 1985 , pp.  69, Crevier 1993 , p.  24, Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  23 and 948  a b McCarthy et al. 1955 . This assertion was printed in the program for the Dartmouth Conference of 1956, widely considered the birth of AI.also Crevier 1993 , p.  28  a b Newell  Simon 1976 and Russell  Norvig 2003 , p.  18  a b c d This version is from Searle 1999 , and is also quoted in Dennett 1991 , p.  435. Searles original formulation was The appropriately programmed computer really is a mind, in the sense that computers given the right programs can be literally said to understand and have other cognitive states.  Searle 1980 , p.  1. Strong AI is defined similarly by Russell  Norvig 2003 , p.  947 The assertion that machines could possibly act intelligently or, perhaps better, act as if they were intelligent is called the weak AI hypothesis by philosophers, and the assertion that machines that do so are actually thinking as opposed to simulating thinking is called the strong AI hypothesis.  a b Hobbes 1651 , chpt. 5  See Russell  Norvig 2003 , p.  3, where they make the distinction between acting rationally and being rational, and define AI as the study of the former.  Saygin 2000 .  Turing 1950 and see Russell  Norvig 2003 , p.  948, where they call his paper famous and write Turing examined a wide variety of possible objections to the possibility of intelligent machines, including virtually all of those that have been raised in the half century since his paper appeared.  Turing 1950 under The Argument from Consciousness  Russell  Norvig 2003 , p.  3  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  45, 32, 35, 36 and 56  Russell and Norvig would prefer the word  rational  to intelligent.  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  4852 consider a thermostat a simple form of intelligent agent , known as a reflex agent . For an in-depth treatment of the role of the thermostat in philosophy see Chalmers 1996 , pp.  293301 4. Is Experience Ubiquitous subsections What is it like to be a thermostat , Whither panpsychism , and Constraining the double-aspect principle .  Dreyfus 1972 , p.  106  Pitts  McCullough 1943  Moravec 1988  Kurzweil 2005 , p.  262. Also see Russell  Norvig , p.  957 and Crevier 1993 , pp.  271 and 279. The most extreme form of this argument the brain replacement scenario was put forward by Clark Glymour in the mid-1970s and was touched on by Zenon Pylyshyn and John Searle in 1980  Eugene Izhikevich 2005-10-27. Eugene M. Izhikevich, Large-Scale Simulation of the Human Brain . Vesicle.nsi.edu. Archived from the original on 2009-05-01 . Retrieved 2010-07-29 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Hubert Dreyfus writes In general, by accepting the fundamental assumptions that the nervous system is part of the physical world and that all physical processes can be described in a mathematical formalism which can, in turn, be manipulated by a digital computer, one can arrive at the strong claim that the behavior which results from human information processing, whether directly formalizable or not, can always be indirectly reproduced on a digital machine.  Dreyfus 1972 , pp.  1945. John Searle writes Could a man made machine think Assuming it possible produce artificially a machine with a nervous system, ... the answer to the question seems to be obviously, yes ... Could a digital computer think If by digital computer you mean anything at all that has a level of description where it can be correctly described as the instantiation of a computer program, then again the answer is, of course, yes, since we are the instantiations of any number of computer programs, and we can think.  Searle 1980 , p.  11  Searle 1980 , p.  7  Searle writes I like the straight forwardness of the claim. Searle 1980 , p.  4  Dreyfus 1979 , p.  156  Haugeland 1985 , p.  5  Gdel, Kurt , 1951, Some basic theorems on the foundations of mathematics and their implications in Solomon Feferman , ed., 1995. Collected works  Kurt Gdel, Vol. III . Oxford University Press 304-23. - In this lecture, Gdel uses the incompleteness theorem to arrive at the following disjunction a the human mind is not a consistent finite machine, or b there exist Diophantine equations for which it cannot decide whether solutions exist. Gdel finds b implausible, and thus seems to have believed the human mind was not equivalent to a finite machine, i.e., its power exceeded that of any finite machine. He recognized that this was only a conjecture, since one could never disprove b. Yet he considered the disjunctive conclusion to be a certain fact.  Lucas 1961 , Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  949950, Hofstadter 1979 , pp.  471473,476477  Graham Oppy 20 January 2015. Gdels Incompleteness Theorems . Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 27 April 2016 . These Gdelian anti-mechanist arguments are, however, problematic, and there is wide consensus that they fail.  Stuart J. Russell  Peter Norvig 2010. 26.1.2 Philosophical FoundationsWeak AI Can Machines Act IntelligentlyThe mathematical objection. Artificial Intelligence A Modern Approach 3rd ed.. Upper Saddle River, NJ Prentice Hall . ISBN   978-0-13-604259-4 . ...even if we grant that computers have limitations on what they can prove, there is no evidence that humans are immune from those limitations.  Mark Colyvan. An introduction to the philosophy of mathematics. Cambridge University Press , 2012. From 2.2.2, Philosophical significance of Gdels incompleteness results The accepted wisdom with which I concur is that the Lucas-Penrose arguments fail.  LaForte, G., Hayes, P. J., Ford, K. M. 1998. Why Gdels theorem cannot refute computationalism. Artificial Intelligence , 104265-286, 1998.  Russell  Norvig 2003 , p.  950 They point out that real machines with finite memory can be modeled using propositional logic , which is formally decidable , and Gdels argument does not apply to them at all.  Hofstadter 1979  According to Hofstadter 1979 , pp.  476477, this statement was first proposed by C. H. Whiteley  Hofstadter 1979 , pp.  476477, Russell  Norvig 2003 , p.  950, Turing 1950 under The Argument from Mathematics where he writes although it is established that there are limitations to the powers of any particular machine, it has only been stated, without sort of proof, that no such limitations apply to the human intellect.  Penrose 1989  Litt, Abninder Eliasmith, Chris Kroon, Frederick W. Weinstein, Steven Thagard, Paul 6 May 2006. Is the Brain a Quantum Computer. Cognitive Science . 30 3 593603. doi  10.1207s15516709cog0000_59 . PMID   21702826 .  Dreyfus 1972 , Dreyfus 1979 , Dreyfus  Dreyfus 1986 . See also Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  950952, Crevier, 1993  120-132 and Hearn 2007 , pp.  5051  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  95051  Turing 1950 under 8 The Argument from the Informality of Behavior  Russell  Norvig 2003 , p.  52  See Brooks 1990 and Moravec 1988  Crevier 1993 , p.  125  a b c Turing 1950 under 4 The Argument from Consciousness. See also Russell  Norvig , pp.  9523, where they identify Searles argument with Turings Argument from Consciousness.  Russell  Norvig 2003 , p.  947  People always tell me it was very hard to define consciousness, but I think if youre just looking for the kind of commonsense definition that you get at the beginning of the investigation, and not at the hard nosed scientific definition that comes at the end, its not hard to give commonsense definition of consciousness. The Philosophers Zone The question of consciousness . Also see Dennett 1991  Blackmore 2005 , p.  2  Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  954956  For example, John Searle writes Can a machine think The answer is, obvious, yes. We are precisely such machines.  Searle 1980 , p.  11  Searle 1980 . See also Cole 2004 , Russell  Norvig 2003 , pp.  958960, Crevier 1993 , pp.  269272 and Hearn 2007 , pp.  4350  Searle 1980 , p.  13  Searle 1984  Cole 2004 , 2.1, Leibniz 1714 , 17  Cole 2004 , 2.3  Searle 1980 under 1. The Systems Reply Berkeley, Crevier 1993 , p.  269, Russell  Norvig 2003 , p.  959, Cole 2004 , 4.1. Among those who hold to the system position according to Cole are Ned Block, Jack Copeland , Daniel Dennett , Jerry Fodor , John Haugeland , Ray Kurzweil and Georges Rey . Those who have defended the virtual mind reply include Marvin Minsky , Alan Perlis , David Chalmers , Ned Block and J. Cole again, according to Cole 2004   Cole 2004 , 4.2 ascribes this position to Ned Block , Daniel Dennett, Tim Maudlin , David Chalmers , Steven Pinker , Patricia Churchland and others.  Searle 1980 under 2. The Robot Reply Yale. Cole 2004 , 4.3 ascribes this position to Margaret Boden , Tim Crane , Daniel Dennett, Jerry Fodor, Stevan Harnad , Hans Moravec and Georges Rey  Quoted in Crevier 1993 , p.  272  Searle 1980 under 3. The Brain Simulator Reply Berkeley and M.I.T. Cole 2004 ascribes this position to Paul and Patricia Churchland and Ray Kurzweil  Searle 1980 under 5. The Other Minds Reply, Cole 2004 , 4.4. Turing 1950 makes this reply under 4 The Argument from Consciousness. Cole ascribes this position to Daniel Dennett and Hans Moravec.  Dreyfus 1979 , p.  156, Haugeland 1985 , pp.  1544  Horst 2005  a b Harnad 2001  a b c Turing 1950 under 5 Arguments from Various Disabilities  a b Quoted in Crevier 1993 , p.  266  Crevier 1993 , p.  266  Turing 1950 under 6 Lady Lovelaces Objection  Turing 1950 under 5 Argument from Various Disabilities  Kaplan Andreas Michael Haenlein. Business Horizons . 62 1 1525. January 2019. doi  10.1016j.bushor.2018.08.004 .  Katz, Leslie 2009-04-02. Robo-scientist makes gene discovery-on its own  Crave - CNET . News.cnet.com . Retrieved 2010-07-29 .  a b Scientists Worry Machines May Outsmart Man By JOHN MARKOFF, NY Times, July 26, 2009.  The Coming Technological Singularity How to Survive in the Post-Human Era , by Vernor Vinge, Department of Mathematical Sciences, San Diego State University, c 1993 by Vernor Vinge.  Call for debate on killer robots , By Jason Palmer, Science and technology reporter, BBC News, 8309.  Science New Navy-funded Report Warns of War Robots Going Terminator , by Jason Mick Blog, dailytech.com, February 17, 2009.  Navy report warns of robot uprising, suggests a strong moral compass , by Joseph L. Flatley engadget.com, Feb 18th 2009.  AAAI Presidential Panel on Long-Term AI Futures 2008-2009 Study , Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence, Accessed 72609.  Article at Asimovlaws.com , July 2004, accessed 72709. Archived June 30, 2009, at the Wayback Machine  Turing 1950 under 1 The Theological Objection, although he also writes, I am not very impressed with theological arguments whatever they may be used to support  Deutsch, David 2012-10-03. Philosophy will be the key that unlocks artificial intelligence  David Deutsch . the Guardian . Retrieved 2018-09-18 . References  edit  Blackmore, Susan 2005, Consciousness A Very Short Introduction , Oxford University Press Bostrom, Nick 2014, Superintelligence Paths, Dangers, Strategies , Oxford University Press , ISBN   978-0-19-967811-2 Brooks, Rodney 1990, Elephants Dont Play Chess PDF , Robotics and Autonomous Systems , 6 12 315, CiteSeerX   10.1.1.588.7539 , doi  10.1016S0921-88900580025-9 , retrieved 2007-08-30 Chalmers, David J 1996, The Conscious Mind In Search of a Fundamental Theory , Oxford University Press, New York, ISBN   978-0-19-511789-9 Cole, David Fall 2004, The Chinese Room Argument, in Zalta, Edward N. ed., The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Crevier, Daniel 1993, AI The Tumultuous Search for Artificial Intelligence , New York, NY BasicBooks, ISBN   0-465-02997-3 Dennett, Daniel 1991, Consciousness Explained , The Penguin Press, ISBN   978-0-7139-9037-9 Dreyfus, Hubert 1972, What Computers Cant Do , New York MIT Press, ISBN   978-0-06-011082-6 Dreyfus, Hubert 1979, What Computers Still Cant Do , New York MIT Press . Dreyfus, Hubert  Dreyfus, Stuart 1986, Mind over Machine The Power of Human Intuition and Expertise in the Era of the Computer , Oxford, UK Blackwell Fearn, Nicholas 2007, The Latest Answers to the Oldest Questions A Philosophical Adventure with the Worlds Greatest Thinkers , New York Grove Press Gladwell, Malcolm 2005, Blink The Power of Thinking Without Thinking , Boston Little, Brown, ISBN   978-0-316-17232-5 . Harnad, Stevan 2001, Whats Wrong and Right About Searles Chinese Room Argument, in Bishop, M. Preston, J. eds., Essays on Searles Chinese Room Argument , Oxford University Press Haugeland, John 1985, Artificial Intelligence The Very Idea , Cambridge, Mass. MIT Press . Hobbes 1651, Leviathan . Hofstadter, Douglas 1979, Gdel, Escher, Bach an Eternal Golden Braid . Horst, Steven 2009, The Computational Theory of Mind, in Zalta, Edward N. ed., The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Kaplan, Andreas  Haenlein, Michael 2018, Siri, Siri in my Hand, whos the Fairest in the Land On the Interpretations, Illustrations and Implications of Artificial Intelligence, Business Horizons , 62 , doi  10.1016j.bushor.2018.08.004 Kurzweil, Ray 2005, The Singularity is Near , New York Viking Press, ISBN   978-0-670-03384-3 . Lucas, John 1961, Minds, Machines and Gdel, in Anderson, A.R. ed., Minds and Machines . McCarthy, John  Minsky, Marvin  Rochester, Nathan  Shannon, Claude 1955, A Proposal for the Dartmouth Summer Research Project on Artificial Intelligence , archived from the original on 2008-09-30 Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  . McDermott, Drew May 14, 1997, How Intelligent is Deep Blue , New York Times Moravec, Hans 1988, Mind Children , Harvard University Press Newell, Allen  Simon, H. A. 1963, GPS A Program that Simulates Human Thought, in Feigenbaum, E.A. Feldman, J. eds., Computers and Thought , New York McGraw-Hill Newell, Allen  Simon, H. A. 1976, Computer Science as Empirical Inquiry Symbols and Search, Communications of the ACM , 19 , archived from the original on 2008-10-07 Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  Russell, Stuart J.  Norvig, Peter 2003, Artificial Intelligence A Modern Approach 2nd ed., Upper Saddle River, New Jersey Prentice Hall, ISBN   0-13-790395-2 Penrose, Roger 1989, The Emperors New Mind Concerning Computers, Minds, and The Laws of Physics , Oxford University Press, ISBN   978-0-14-014534-2 Searle, John 1980, Minds, Brains and Programs PDF , Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 3 3 417457, doi  10.1017S0140525X00005756 , archived from the original PDF on 2015-09-23 Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  Searle, John 1992, The Rediscovery of the Mind , Cambridge, Massachusetts M.I.T. Press Searle, John 1999, Mind, language and society , New York, NY Basic Books, ISBN   978-0-465-04521-1 , OCLC   231867665 Turing, Alan October 1950, Computing Machinery and Intelligence, Mind , LIX 236 433460, doi  10.1093mindLIX.236.433 , ISSN   0026-4423 Yee, Richard 1993, Turing Machines And Semantic Symbol Processing Why Real Computers Dont Mind Chinese Emperors PDF , Lyceum , 5 1 3759 Page numbers above and diagram contents refer to the Lyceum PDF print of the article. v t e Philosophy of mind Theories Behaviorism  Radical  Biological naturalism Cognitive psychology Computationalism Mindbody dualism Eliminative materialism Emergent materialism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Idealism Interactionism Materialism Monism Nave realism Neurophenomenology Neutral monism Occasionalism Psychoanalysis Parallelism Phenomenalism Phenomenology Physicalism identity theory Property dualism Representational Solipsism Substance dualism Concepts Abstract object Artificial intelligence Chinese room Cognition Cognitive closure Concept Concept and object Consciousness Hard problem of consciousness Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Ingenuity Intelligence Intentionality Introspection Intuition Language of thought Materialism Mental event Mental image Mental property Mental representation Mind Mindbody problem Non-physical entity New mysterianism Pain Privileged access Problem of other minds Propositional attitude Qualia Tabula rasa Understanding Zombie more... Related topics Metaphysics Philosophy of artificial intelligence   information   perception   self Portal Category Philosophers category Project Task Force v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analyticsynthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Commensurability Consilience Construct Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific law Scientific method Scientific revolution Scientific theory Testability Theory choice Theory-ladenness Underdetermination Unity of science Metatheory of science Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Instrumentalism Pragmatism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism   Reductionism   Determinism Rationalism   Empiricism Received view   Semantic view of theories Scientific realism   Anti-realism Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Vitalism Philosophy of Physics thermal and statistical Motion Chemistry Biology Environment Geography Social science Technology Engineering Artificial intelligence Computer science Information Mind Psychiatry Psychology Perception Space and time Related topics Alchemy Criticism of science Epistemology Faith and rationality History and philosophy of science History of science History of evolutionary thought Logic Metaphysics Pseudoscience Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Sociology of scientific knowledge Sociology of scientific ignorance Philosophers of science by era Ancient Plato Aristotle Stoicism Epicureans Medieval Averroes Avicenna Roger Bacon William of Ockham Hugh of Saint Victor Dominicus Gundissalinus Robert Kilwardby Early modern Francis Bacon Thomas Hobbes Ren Descartes Galileo Galilei Pierre Gassendi Isaac Newton David Hume Late modern Immanuel Kant Friedrich Schelling William Whewell Auguste Comte John Stuart Mill Herbert Spencer Wilhelm Wundt Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Henri Poincar Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Contemporary Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Albert Einstein Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Jrgen Habermas Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Daniel Dennett Portal Category v t e Psychology History Philosophy Portal Psychologist Basic psychology Abnormal Affective science Affective neuroscience Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Behaviorism Cognitive  Cognitivism Cognitive neuroscience Social Comparative Cross-cultural Cultural Developmental Differential Ecological Evolutionary Experimental Gestalt Intelligence Mathematical Moral Neuropsychology Perception Personality Positive Psycholinguistics Psychophysiology Quantitative Social Theoretical Applied psychology Anomalistic Applied behavior analysis Assessment Clinical Coaching Community Consumer Counseling Critical Educational Ergonomics Feminist Forensic Health Industrial and organizational Legal Media Medical Military Music Occupational health Pastoral Political Psychometrics Psychotherapy Religion School Sport and exercise Suicidology Systems Traffic Methodologies Animal testing Archival research Behavior epigenetics Case study Content analysis Experiments Human subject research Interviews Neuroimaging Observation Psychophysics Qualitative research Quantitative research Self-report inventory Statistical surveys Psychologists Wilhelm Wundt  18321920 William James  18421910 Ivan Pavlov  18491936 Sigmund Freud  18561939 Edward Thorndike  18741949 Carl Jung  18751961 John B. Watson  18781958 Clark L. Hull  18841952 Kurt Lewin  18901947 Jean Piaget  18961980 Gordon Allport  18971967 J. P. Guilford  18971987 Carl Rogers  19021987 Erik Erikson  19021994 B. F. Skinner  19041990 Donald O. Hebb  19041985 Ernest Hilgard  19042001 Harry Harlow  19051981 Raymond Cattell  19051998 Abraham Maslow  19081970 Neal E. Miller  19092002 Jerome Bruner  19152016 Donald T. Campbell  19161996 Hans Eysenck  19161997 Herbert A. Simon  19162001 David McClelland  19171998 Leon Festinger  19191989 George A. Miller  19202012 Richard Lazarus  19222002 Stanley Schachter  19221997 Robert Zajonc  19232008 Albert Bandura  b.  1925 Roger Brown  19251997 Endel Tulving  b.  1927 Lawrence Kohlberg  19271987 Noam Chomsky  b.  1928 Ulric Neisser  19282012 Jerome Kagan  b.  1929 Walter Mischel  19302018 Elliot Aronson  b.  1932 Daniel Kahneman  b.  1934 Paul Ekman  b.  1934 Michael Posner  b.  1936 Amos Tversky  19371996 Bruce McEwen  b.  1938 Larry Squire  b.  1941 Richard E. Nisbett  b.  1941 Martin Seligman  b.  1942 Ed Diener  b.  1946 Shelley E. Taylor  b.  1946 John Anderson  b.  1947 Ronald C. Kessler  b.  1947 Joseph E. LeDoux  b.  1949 Richard Davidson  b.  1951 Susan Fiske  b.  1952 Roy Baumeister  b.  1953 Lists Counseling topics Disciplines Important publications Organizations Outline Psychologists Psychotherapies Research methods Schools of thought Timeline Topics Wiktionary definition Wiktionary category Wikisource Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikinews Wikibooks v t e Philosophy Branches Traditional Metaphysics Ontology Epistemology Logic Ethics Aesthetics Philosophy of Action Art Culture Design Music Film Business Color Cosmos Dialogue Education Environment Futility Happiness Healthcare History Human nature Humor Feminism Language Life Literature Mathematics Mind Pain Psychology Philosophy of psychiatry Philosophy of perception Philosophy Religion Science Physics Chemistry Biology Geography Sexuality Social science Culture Economics Justice Law Politics Society Space and time Sport Technology Artificial intelligence Computer science Engineering Information War Schools of thought By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Neotaoism Taoism Yangism Zen Greco- Roman Aristotelianism Atomism Cynicism Cyrenaics Eleatics Eretrian school Epicureanism Hermeneutics Ionian Ephesian Milesian Megarian school Neoplatonism Peripatetic Platonism Pluralism Presocratic Pyrrhonism Pythagoreanism Neopythagoreanism Sophistic Stoicism Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mms jvika Ajana Crvka Jain Anekantavada Sydvda Buddhist nyat Madhyamaka Yogacara Sautrntika Svatantrika Persian Mazdakism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism East Asian Korean Confucianism Edo neo-Confucianism Neo-Confucianism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyya Islamic Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism Ilm al-Kalm Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo-Kantianism Hegelianism Marxism Spinozism 0 Anarchism Classical Realism Liberalism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism   Coherentism Generative linguistics Internalism and Externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Normative ethics Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School New Historicism Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Other Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism more... Positions Aesthetics Formalism Institutionalism Aesthetic response Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Monism Naturalism Epistemology Constructivism Empiricism Idealism Particularism Fideism Rationalism   Reasonism Skepticism Solipsism Mind Behaviorism Emergentism Eliminativism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By region Related lists Miscellaneous By region African Ethiopian Amerindian Aztec Eastern Chinese Egyptian Indian Indonesian Iranian Japanese Korean Pakistani Vietnamese Western American Australian British Czech Danish French German Greek Italian Polish Romanian Russian Slovene Spanish Turkish Lists Outline Index Years Problems Schools Glossary Philosophers Movements Publications Miscellaneous Natural law Women in philosophy Sage philosophy Portal Category Book Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitlePhilosophy_of_artificial_intelligence oldid913992857  Categories  Philosophy of science Philosophy of technology Philosophy of mind Philosophy of artificial intelligence Open problems Philosophy of science by discipline Hidden categories CS1 errors deprecated parameters Webarchive template wayback links All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2017 Articles with unsourced quotes All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from April 2017 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from April 2017 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2017 Portal templates with redlinked portals Articles containing video clips