Biological engineering From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Application of biology and engineering to create useful products This article may be confusing or unclear to readers . Please help us clarify the article . There might be a discussion about this on the talk page .  November 2017   Learn how and when to remove this template message  A ribosome is a biological machine that utilizes protein dynamics Some biological machines Biological engineering , or bioengineering  bio-engineering , is the application of principles of biology and the tools of engineering to create usable, tangible, economically viable products. 1  Biological engineering employs knowledge and expertise from a number of pure and applied sciences, 2  such as mass and heat transfer, kinetics, biocatalysts, biomechanics, bioinformatics , separation and purification processes, bioreactor design, surface science, fluid mechanics, thermodynamics , and polymer science. It is used in the design of medical devices, diagnostic equipment, biocompatible materials, renewable bioenergy, ecological engineering, agricultural engineering, and other areas that improve the living standards of societies. Examples of bioengineering research include bacteria engineered to produce chemicals, new medical imaging technology, portable and rapid disease diagnostic devices, prosthetics , biopharmaceuticals , and tissue-engineered organs 3  . Bioengineering overlaps substantially with biotechnology and the biomedical sciences 4  in a way analogous to how various other forms of engineering and technology relate to various other sciences for example, aerospace engineering and other space technology to kinetics and astrophysics . In general, biological engineers or biomedical engineers  attempt to either mimic biological systems to create products or modify and control biological systems so that they can replace, augment, sustain, or predict chemical and mechanical processes. 5  Bioengineers can apply their expertise to other applications of engineering and biotechnology , including genetic modification of plants and microorganisms, bioprocess engineering, and biocatalysis. Working with doctors, clinicians and researchers, bioengineers use traditional engineering principles and techniques and apply them to real-world biological and medical problems 6  . Contents 1 History 2 Education 3 Sub-disciplines 4 Organizations 5 References 6 External links History  edit  Biological engineering is a science-based discipline founded upon the biological sciences in the same way that chemical engineering , electrical engineering , and mechanical engineering 7  can be based upon chemistry, electricity and magnetism, and classical mechanics, respectively. 8  Before WWII, biological engineering had just begun being recognized as a branch of engineering, and was a very new concept to people. Post-WWII, it started to grow more rapidly, partially due to the term bioengineering being coined by British scientist and broadcaster Heinz Wolff in 1954 at the National Institute for Medical Research. Wolff graduated that same year and became the director of the Division of Biological Engineering at the university. This was the first time Bioengineering was recognized as its own branch at a university. Electrical engineering is considered to pioneer this engineering sector due to its work with medical devices and machi nery during this time 9  .When engineers and life scientists started working together, they recognized the problem that the engineers didnt know enough about the actual biology behind their work. To resolve this problem, engineers who wanted to get into biological engineering devoted more of their time and studies to the details and processes that go into fields such as biology, psychology, and medici ne 10  .The term biological engineering may also be applied to environmental modifications such as surface soil protection, slope stabilization, watercourse and shoreline protection, windbreaks, vegetation barriers including noise barriers and visual screens, and the ecological enhancement of an area. Because other engineering disciplines also address living organisms , the term biological engineering can be applied more broadly to include agricultural engineering . The first biological engineering program was created at University of California, San Diego in 1966, making it the first biological engineering curriculum in the United States. 11  More recent programs have been launched at MIT 12  and Utah State University . 13  Many old agricultural engineering departments in universities over the world have re-branded themselves as agricultural and biological engineering or agricultural and biosystems engineering , due to biological engineering as a whole being a rapidly developing field with fluid categorization. According to Professor Doug Lauffenburger of MIT, 12  14  biological engineering has a broad base which applies engineering principles to an enormous range of size and complexities of systems. These systems range from the molecular level  molecular biology , biochemistry , microbiology , pharmacology , protein chemistry, cytology , immunology , neurobiology and neuroscience  to cellular and tissue-based systems including devices and sensors, to whole macroscopic organisms plants, animals, and can even range up to entire ecosystems. Education  edit  The average length of study is three to five years, and the completed degree is signified as a bachelor of engineering  B.S. in engineering. Fundamental courses include thermodynamics, bio-mechanics, biology, genetic engineering, fluid and mechanical dynamics, kinetics, electronics, and materials properties. 15  16  Sub-disciplines  edit  Modeling of the spread of disease using Cellular Automata and Nearest Neighbor Interactions Depending on the institution and particular definitional boundaries employed, some major branches of bioengineering may be categorized as note these may overlap Biomedical engineering  application of engineering principles and design concepts to medicine and biology for healthcare purposes 17  Tissue engineering Genetic engineering Neural engineering Pharmaceutical engineering Clinical engineering Bioinformatics Biomechanics Biochemical engineering  fermentation engineering, application of engineering principles to microscopic biological systems that are used to create new products by synthesis, including the production of protein from suitable raw materials 17  Biological systems engineering  application of engineering principles and design concepts to agriculture, food sciences, and ecosystems. 7  Bioprocess engineering  develops technology to monitor the conditions of the where the process of making pharmaceuticals takes place 17  , Ex bioprocess design , biocatalysis , bioseparation , bioinformatics , bioenergy  Environmental health engineering  application of engineering principles to the control of the environment for the health, comfort, and safety of human beings. It includes the field of life-support systems for the exploration of outer space and the ocean 17  Human-factors engineering  application of engineering, physiology, and psychology to the optimization of the humanmachine relationship 17  Biotechnology  the use of living systems and organisms to develop or make products 18  . Ex pharmaceuticals 17  Biomimetics  the imitation of models, systems, and elements of nature for the purpose of solving complex human problems. Ex velcro, designed after George de Mestral noticed how easily burs stuck to a dogs hair 19   Bioelectrical engineering  Biomechanical engineering  Bionics  an integration of Biomedical, focused more on the robotics and assisted technologies. Ex prosthetics 17  Bioprinting  utilizing biomaterials to print organs and new tissues 20  Biorobotics  Ex prosthetics Systems biology  The study of biological systems. Organizations  edit  Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology ABET, 21  the U.S.-based accreditation board for engineering B.S. programs, makes a distinction between biomedical engineering and biological engineering, though there is much overlap see above. American Institute for Medical and Biological Engineering AIMBE is made up of 1,500 members. Their main goal is to educate the public about the value biological engineering has in our world, as well as invest in research and other programs to advance the field. They give out awards to those dedicated to innovation in the field, and awards of achievement in the field. They do not have a direct contribution to biological engineering , they more recognize those who do and encourage the public to continue that forward movement. 22  Institute of Biological Engineering IBE is a non-profit organization, they run on donations alone. They aim to encourage the public to learn and to continue advancements in biological engineering. Like AIMBE, they dont do research directly, they do however offer scholarships to students who show promise in the field. 23  Society for Biological Engineering SBE is a technological community associated with the American Institute of Chemical Engineers AIChE. SBE hosts international conferences, and is a global organization of leading engineers and scientists dedicated to advancing the integration of biology with engineering. 24  References  edit   Abramovitz, Melissa 2015. Biological engineering . Gale Virtual Reference Library. p.  10. ISBN   978-1-62968-526-7 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Herold, Keith Bentley, William E. Vossoughi, Jafar 2010. The Basics of Bioengineering Education . 26Th Southern Biomedical Engineering Conference, College Park, Maryland. p.  65. ISBN   9783642149979 .  What is Bioengineering . bioeng.berkeley.edu . Retrieved 2018-07-21 .  Biotechnology vs Biomedical Science vs Biomedical Engineering Bioengineering . Tanmoy Ray . 2018-07-19 . Retrieved 2018-07-21 .  Pasotti, Lorenzo Zucca, Susanna 2014-08-03. Advances and Computational Tools towards Predictable Design in Biological Engineering . Computational and Mathematical Methods in Medicine . 2014  369681. doi  10.11552014369681 . PMC   4137594 . PMID   25161694 .  Sheffield, University of. What is bioengineering - Bioengineering - The University of Sheffield . www.sheffield.ac.uk . Retrieved 2018-07-21 .  a b Abramovitz, Melissa 2015. Biological Engineering . Gale Virtual Reference Library. p.  18. ISBN   978-1-62968-526-7 .  Cuello JC, Engineering to biology and biology to engineering, The bi-directional connection between engineering and biology in biological engineering design, Int J Engng Ed 2005, 21, 1-7  Medical  biological engineering . Oxford   New York Pergamon Press. 19661976. CS1 maint date format  link   Naik, edited by Ganesh R. 2012. Applied biological engineering   principles and practice . Rijeka InTech. ISBN   9789535104124 . CS1 maint extra text authors list  link   Founder of UCSD Bioengineering Program . jacobsschool.ucsd.edu. 1 Mar 2004 . Retrieved 22 May 2018 .  a b MIT, Department of Biological Engineering . Retrieved 16 April 2015 .  Utah State University, Department of Biological Engineering . be.usu.edu . Retrieved 2011-11-13 .  MIT Directory, Doug Lauffenburger . Retrieved 15 April 2015 .  Linsenmeier RA, Defining the Undergraduate Biomedical Engineering Curriculum  Johnson AT, Phillips WM. Philosophical foundations of biological engineering. Journal of Engineering Education . 1995 84 311318.  a b c d e f g Bioengineering . Encyclopedia Britannica .  Convention on Biological Diversity . Retrieved 27 April 2018 .  Biomimetics its practice and theory . Royal Society Publishing .  Bioprinting . Retrieved 1 May 2018 .  ABET Accreditation , accessed 982010.  AIMBE About Page .  Institute of Biological Engineering . Retrieved 20 April 2018 .  The Society for Biological Engineering . Retrieved 21 August 2019 . External links  edit  Bioengineering Society Biomedical Engineering Society Institute of Biological Engineering Benjoe Institute of Systems Biological Engineering American Institute of Medical and Biological Engineering American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers Society for Biological Engineering part of AIChE Journal of Biological Engineering, JBE Biological Engineering Transactions v t e Topics related to biology People and history Biologist Notable biologists History of biology Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine Timeline of biology and organic chemistry List of geneticists and biochemists Institutions, publications Bachelor of Science Publications Terms and phrases Omne vivum ex ovo In vivo In vitro In utero In silico Related disciplines Medicine  Physician  Physical anthropology Environmental science Life Sciences Biotechnology Other List of conservation topics Altricial and Precocial development strategies v t e Engineering Civil Architectural Construction Environmental Earthquake Geotechnical Hydraulic Mining Structural Transportation Mechanical Acoustical Aerospace Automotive Marine Railway Thermal Electrical Computer Control Electromechanics Electronics Microwaves Power Radio Frequency Telecommunications Chemical Biochemical Biological Molecular Petroleum Process Reaction Interdisciplinary Audio Biomedical Engineering mathematics Engineering mechanics Engineering physics Engineering science Fire Industrial Information Materials science Ceramics Metallurgy Polymer Mechatronics Military Nanotechnology Nuclear Optical Photonics Privacy Robotics Sanitary Security Software Systems Glossaries Engineering Aerospace engineering Civil engineering Electrical and electronics engineering Mechanical engineering Structural engineering List of engineering branches CategoryEngineering Engineering portal Authority control LCCN  sh85014134 NARA  10639103 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleBiological_engineering oldid913961556  Categories  Biological engineering Hidden categories CS1 maint date format CS1 maint extra text authors list Articles with short description Wikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2017 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers Wikipedia articles with NARA identifiers