Integrated development environment From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Anjuta is an IDE for C and C programming in the GNOME desktop environment. An integrated development environment  IDE  is a software application that provides comprehensive facilities to computer programmers for software development . An IDE normally consists of at least a source code editor , build automation tools, and a debugger . Some IDEs, such as NetBeans and Eclipse , contain the necessary compiler , interpreter , or both others, such as SharpDevelop and Lazarus , do not. The boundary between an IDE and other parts of the broader software development environment is not well-defined sometimes a version control system or various tools to simplify the construction of a graphical user interface GUI are integrated. Many modern IDEs also have a class browser , an object browser , and a class hierarchy diagram for use in object-oriented software development . Contents 1 Overview 2 History 3 Topics 3.1 Syntax highlighting 3.2 Code Completion 3.3 Refactoring 3.4 Version control 3.5 Debugging 3.6 Code search 3.7 Visual programming 3.8 Language support 3.9 Attitudes across different computing platforms 4 Artificial intelligence 5 Web integrated development environment 6 See also 7 References Overview  edit  Integrated development environments are designed to maximize programmer productivity by providing tight-knit components with similar user interfaces . IDEs present a single program in which all development is done. This program typically provides many features for authoring, modifying, compiling, deploying and debugging software. This contrasts with software development using unrelated tools, such as vi , GCC or make . One aim of the IDE is to reduce the configuration necessary to piece together multiple development utilities, instead it provides the same set of capabilities as one cohesive unit. Reducing setup time can increase developer productivity, especially in cases where learning to use the IDE is faster than manually integrating and learning all of the individual tools. Tighter inte gration of all development tasks has the potential to improve overall productivity beyond just helping with setup tasks. For example, code can be continuously parsed while it is being edited, providing instant feedback when syntax errors are introduced. Allowing developers to debug code much faster and easier with an IDE. Some IDEs are dedicated to a specific programming language , allowing a feature set that most closely matches the programming paradigms of the language. However, there are many multiple-language IDEs. While most modern IDEs are graphical, text-based IDEs such as Turbo Pascal were in popular use before the availability of windowing systems like Microsoft Windows and the X Window System X11. They commonly use function keys or hotkeys to execute frequently used commands or macros. History  edit  GNU Emacs , an extensible editor that is commonly used as an IDE on Unix-like systems IDEs initially became possible when developing via a console or terminal . Early systems could not support one, since programs were prepared using flowcharts, entering programs with punched cards or paper tape, etc. before submitting them to a compiler . Dartmouth BASIC was the first language to be created with an IDE and was also the first to be designed for use while sitting in front of a console or terminal.  citation needed  Its IDE part of the Dartmouth Time Sharing System  was command-based, and therefore did not look much like the menu-driven, graphical IDEs popular after the advent of the Graphical User Interface . However it integrated editing, file management, compilation, debugging and execution in a manner consistent with a modern IDE. See also Structured Programming Facility from IBM 1974. Maestro I is a product from Softlab Munich and was the worlds first integrated development environment 1  for software. Maestro I was installed for 22,000 programmers worldwide. Until 1989, 6,000 installations existed in the Federal Republic of Germany . Maestro was arguably the world leader in this field during the 1970s and 1980s. Today one of the last Maestro I can be found in the Museum of Information Technology at Arlington. One of the first IDEs with a plug-in concept was Softbench . In 1995 Computerwoche commented that the use of an IDE was not well received by developers since it would fence in their creativity. As of March 2015, the most popular IDEs are Eclipse and Visual Studio . 2  Topics  edit  Syntax highlighting  edit  The IDE editor usually provides syntax highlighting , it can show both the structures, the language keywords and the syntax errors with visually distinct colors and font effects. 3  Code Completion  edit  Code completion is an important IDE feature, meant to speed up programming, and modern IDEs even have intelligent code completion . Refactoring  edit  Advanced IDEs provide support for automated refactoring . 3  Version control  edit  An IDE is expected to provide integrated version control , in order to interact with source repositories. 3  Debugging  edit  IDEs are also used for debugging, using an integrated debugger , with support for setting breakpoints in the editor, visual rendering of steps, etc. 4  Code search  edit  IDEs may provide advanced support for code search in order to find class and function declarations, usages, variable and field readwrite, etc. IDEs can use different kinds of user interface for code search, for example form-based widgets 5  and natural-language based interfaces. 6  Visual programming  edit  Visual programming is a usage scenario in which an IDE is generally required. Visual Basic allows users to create new applications by moving programming, building blocks, or code nodes to create flowcharts or structure diagrams that are then compiled or interpreted. These flowcharts often are based on the Unified Modeling Language . This interface has been popularized with the Lego Mindstorms system, and is being actively pursued by a number of companies wishing to capitalize on the power of custom browsers like those found at Mozilla . KTechlab supports flowcode and is a popular opensource IDE and Simulator for developing software for microcontrollers. Visual programming is also responsible for the power of distributed programming cf. LabVIEW and EICASLAB software. An early visual programming system, Max , was modeled after analog synthesizer design and has been used to develop real-time music performance software since the 1980s. Another early example was Prograph , a dataflow -based system originally developed for the Macintosh . The graphical programming environment Grape is used to program qfix robot kits . This approach is also used in specialist software such as Openlab , where the end users want the flexibility of a full programming language, without the traditional learning curve associated with one. Language support  edit  Some IDEs support multiple languages, such as GNU Emacs based on C and Emacs Lisp , and IntelliJ IDEA , Eclipse , MyEclipse or NetBeans , all based on Java , or MonoDevelop , based on C , or PlayCode. Support for alternative languages is often provided by plugins , allowing them to be installed on the same IDE at the same time. For example, Flycheck is a modern on-the-fly syntax checking extension for GNU Emacs 24 with support for 39 languages. 7  Eclipse , and Netbeans have plugins for C  C , Ada , GNAT for example AdaGIDE , Perl , Python , Ruby , and PHP , which are selected between automatically based on file extension, environment or project settings. Attitudes across different computing platforms  edit  Unix programmers can combine command-line POSIX tools into a complete development environment, capable of developing large programs such as the Linux kernel and its environment. 8  In this sense, the entire Unix system functions as an IDE. 9  The free software GNU tools  GNU Compiler Collection GCC, GNU Debugger gdb, and GNU make  are available on many platforms, including Windows. 10  The pervasive Unix philosophy of everything is a text stream enables developers who favor command-line oriented tools to use editors with support for many of the standard Unix and GNU build tools, building an IDE with programs like Emacs 11  12  13  or Vim . Data Display Debugger is intended to be an advanced graphical front-end for many text-based debugger standard tools. Some programmers prefer managing makefiles and their derivatives to the similar code building tools included in a full IDE. For example, most contributors to the PostgreSQL database use make and gdb directly to develop new features. 14  Even when building PostgreSQL for Microsoft Windows using Visual C , Perl scripts are used as a replacement for make rather than relying on any IDE features. 15  Some Linux IDEs such as Geany attempt to provide a graphical front end to traditional build operations. On the various Microsoft Windows platforms, command-line tools for development are seldom used. Accordingly, there are many commercial and non-commercial products. However, each has a different design commonly creating incompatibilities. Most major compiler vendors for Windows still provide free copies of their command-line tools, including Microsoft  Visual C , Platform SDK , .NET Framework SDK, nmake utility. IDEs have always been popular on the Apple Macintoshs classic Mac OS and macOS , dating back to Macintosh Programmers Workshop , Turbo Pascal , THINK Pascal and THINK C environments of the mid-1980s. Currently macOS programmers can choose between native IDEs like Xcode and open-source tools such as Eclipse and Netbeans . ActiveState Komodo is a proprietary multilanguage IDE supported on macOS. Artificial intelligence  edit  Some features of IDEs can benefit from advances in AI. 16  In particular, one can collect information from IDE actions across developers in order to augment IDE features. 17  For instance, a data-driven approach to code completion results in intelligent code completion . Web integrated development environment  edit  Main article Online integrated development environment An web integrated development environment Web IDE, also known as an Online IDE or Cloud IDE, is a browser based IDE that allows for software development or web development. 18  A web IDE can be accessed from a web browser, such as Google Chrome or Internet Explorer, allowing for a portable work environment. A web IDE does not usually contain all of the same features as a traditional, or desktop, IDE, although all of the basic IDE features, such as syntax highlighting, are typically present. See also  edit  Wikimedia Commons has media related to Integrated development environments . Computer programming portal Comparison of integrated development environments Collaborative development environment CDE Computer-aided software engineering CASE Game integrated development environment Multiple document interface   IDE-style interface MDI Rapid application development RAD ReadEvalPrint Loop REPL Code analysis tools Source code refactoring tools Software building tools the compiler , linker , etc., and the build automation tool used to control them Version control , also called source repository configuration management Language Server Protocol References  edit   Interaktives Programmieren als Systems-Schlager from Computerwoche  German   Top IDE index  a b c Course CS350 Integrated Development Environments . www.cs.odu.edu . Old Dominion University . Retrieved 10 October 2018 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Programming software and the IDE . BBC Bitesize . Retrieved 10 October 2018 .  Eclipse Cookbook - Searching Code . OReilly .  Kimmig, Markus Monperrus, Martin Mezini, Mira 2011. Querying source code with natural language . arXiv  1205.6361 . doi  10.1109ASE.2011.6100076 . Cite journal requires journal  help   Archived copy . Archived from the original on 10 March 2014 . Retrieved 10 March 2014 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  CS1 maint archived copy as title  link   Rehman, Christopher Paul, Christopher R. Paul. The Linux Development Platform Configuring, Using and Maintaining a Complete Programming Environment. 2002. ISBN   0-13-009115-4  UnixIsAnIde .  Use Emacs with Microsoft Visual C ... use Emacs as an IDE Archived 4 July 2013 at the Wayback Machine  Emacs the Free Software IDE  Using Emacs as a Lisp IDE  Emacs as a Perl IDE  PostgreSQL Developer FAQ  PostgreSQL Installation from Source Code on Windows  Williams, Christina Mercer  Hannah. AI tools all developers need to try . Techworld .  Bruch, Marcel Bodden, Eric Monperrus, Martin Mezini, Mira. IDE 2.0 collective intelligence in software development . doi  10.11451882362.1882374 . Cite journal requires journal  help   Web-based vs. desktop-based Tools  EclipseSource . eclipsesource.com . v t e Integrated development environments C and C Open source Android Studio Anjuta CodeBlocks CodeLite Dev-C Eclipse Geany GNAT Programming Studio GNOME Builder KDevelop MonoDevelop NetBeans QDevelop Qt Creator SharpDevelop Ultimate OpenWatcom Freeware Oracle Developer Studio Visual Studio Community Xcode Retail CBuilder Eclipse -based CodeWarrior MyEclipse Visual Studio By JetBrains IntelliJ IDEA AppCode CLion LabWindowsCVI LccWin32 IBM Rational Software Architect Understand Discontinued IBM VisualAge Visual C Express Java Open source BlueJ DrJava Eclipse Geany Greenfoot IntelliJ IDEA Community Edition Android Studio NetBeans Servoy Community Edition Freeware jGRASP JDeveloper Xcode Retail JCreator MyEclipse IBM Rational Application Developer WebSphere Integration Developer JetBrains IntelliJ IDEA Servoy Business Application Platform Edition Understand Discontinued Metrowerks CodeWarrior Pro for Java JBuilder Sun Java Studio Creator superseded by NetBeans  Visual Age superseded by Eclipse  Visual Caf aka Espresso, superseded by JBuilder  Visual J Xelfi became NetBeans  CLI Open source MonoDevelop SharpDevelop Visual Studio Code PascalABC.NET Freeware Visual Studio Community Retail Visual Studio Rider Understand Discontinued Xamarin Studio Visual Basic Express Visual Web Developer Express Visual J Express Visual Studio Express for Windows Phone Visual C Express Visual C Express Express for Desktop Express for Web Express for Windows Flash Adobe Flash Builder FlashDevelop Powerflasher FDT PHP Aptana NetBeans PhpStorm KDevelop Python Eric Light Table Ninja-IDE PyCharm PyDev Spyder Wing IDE KDevelop Visual Studio Code Pascal and Object Pascal Open source Free Pascal IDE Lazarus Dev-Pascal GNAVI Freeware Delphi Community Retail Delphi Discontinued Turbo Pascal for Windows Virtual Pascal BASIC Open source MonoDevelop SharpDevelop Gambas HBasic Basic For Qt QB64 Freeware Microsoft Small Basic FutureBASIC RapidQ thinAir Retail B4X  Basic4ppc  Microsoft Visual Studio NS Basic PureBasic GLBasic Liberty BASIC Xojo Discontinued QuickBASIC QBasic Visual Basic R RStudio R Tools for Visual Studio Online AWS Cloud9 IDE Eclipse Che Category Comparison Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleIntegrated_development_environment oldid908537796  Categories  Integrated development environments Hidden categories CS1 errors missing periodical CS1 errors deprecated parameters CS1 maint archived copy as title Webarchive template wayback links All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2016 Commons category link is on Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2012