Outline of computer science From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Overview of and topical guide to computer science Computer science also called computing science  is the study of the theoretical foundations of information and computation and their implementation and application in computer systems. One well known subject classification system for computer science is the ACM Computing Classification System devised by the Association for Computing Machinery . .mw-parser-output .toclimit-2 .toclevel-1 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-3 .toclevel-2 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-4 .toclevel-3 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-5 .toclevel-4 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-6 .toclevel-5 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-7 .toclevel-6 uldisplaynone Contents 1 What is computer science 2 Subfields 2.1 Mathematical foundations 2.2 Algorithms and data structures 2.3 Artificial intelligence 2.4 Communication and security 2.5 Computer architecture 2.6 Computer graphics 2.7 Concurrent, parallel, and distributed systems 2.8 Databases 2.9 Programming languages and compilers 2.10 Scientific computing 2.11 Software engineering 2.12 Theory of computation 3 History 4 Professions 5 Data and data structures 6 Programming paradigms 7 See also 8 External links What is computer science  edit  Computer science can be described as all of the following Academic discipline Science Applied science Subfields  edit  Mathematical foundations  edit  Coding theory  Useful in networking and other areas where computers communicate with each other. Game theory  Useful in artificial intelligence and cybernetics . Graph theory  Foundations for data structures and searching algorithms. Mathematical logic  Boolean logic and other ways of modeling logical queries the uses and limitations of formal proof methods Number theory  Theory of the integers . Used in cryptography as well as a test domain in artificial intelligence . Algorithms and data structures  edit  Algorithms  Sequential and parallel computational procedures for solving a wide range of problems. Data structures  The organization and manipulation of data. Artificial intelligence  edit  Outline of artificial intelligence Artificial intelligence  The implementation and study of systems that exhibit an autonomous intelligence or behavior of their own. Automated reasoning  Solving engines, such as used in Prolog , which produce steps to a result given a query on a fact and rule database, and automated theorem provers that aim to prove mathematical theorems with some assistance from a programmer. Computer vision  Algorithms for identifying three-dimensional objects from a two-dimensional picture. Soft computing , the use of inexact solutions for otherwise extremely difficult problems Machine learning - Automated creation of a set of rules and axioms based on input. Evolutionary computing - Biologically inspired algorithms. Natural language processing - Building systems and algorithms that analyze, understand, and generate natural human languages. Robotics  Algorithms for controlling the behaviour of robots. Communication and security  edit  Networking  Algorithms and protocols for reliably communicating data across different shared or dedicated media, often including error correction . Computer security  Practical aspects of securing computer systems and computer networks. Cryptography  Applies results from complexity, probability, algebra and number theory to invent and break codes , and analyze the security of cryptographic protocols . Computer architecture  edit  Computer architecture  The design, organization, optimization and verification of a computer system, mostly about CPUs and Memory subsystem and the bus connecting them. Operating systems  Systems for managing computer programs and providing the basis of a usable system. Computer graphics  edit  Computer graphics  Algorithms both for generating visual images synthetically, and for integrating or altering visual and spatial information sampled from the real world. Image processing  Determining information from an image through computation. Information visualization  Methods for representing and displaying abstract data to facilitate human interaction for exploration and understanding. Concurrent, parallel, and distributed systems  edit  Parallel computing - The theory and practice of simultaneous computation data safety in any multitasking or multithreaded environment. Concurrency computer science  Computing using multiple concurrent threads of execution, devising algorithms for solving problems on multiple processors to achieve maximal speed-up compared to sequential execution. Distributed computing  Computing using multiple computing devices over a network to accomplish a common objective or task and thereby reducing the latency involved in single processor contributions for any task. Databases  edit  Relational databases  the set theoretic and algorithmic foundation of databases. Structured Storage - non-relational databases such as NoSQL databases. Data mining  Study of algorithms for searching and processing information in documents and databases closely related to information retrieval . Programming languages and compilers  edit  Compiler theory  Theory of compiler design, based on Automata theory . Programming language pragmatics  Taxonomy of programming languages, their strength and weaknesses. Various programming paradigms , such as object-oriented programming . Programming language theory Formal semantics  rigorous mathematical study of the meaning of programs. Type theory  Formal analysis of the types of data, and the use of these types to understand properties of programs  especially program safety. Scientific computing  edit  Computational science  constructing mathematical models and quantitative analysis techniques and using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. Numerical analysis  Approximate numerical solution of mathematical problems such as root-finding , integration , the solution of ordinary differential equations  the approximation of special functions . Symbolic computation  Manipulation and solution of expressions in symbolic form, also known as Computer algebra . Computational physics  Numerical simulations of large non-analytic systems Computational chemistry  Computational modelling of theoretical chemistry in order to determine chemical structures and properties Bioinformatics and Computational biology  The use of computer science to maintain, analyse, store biological data and to assist in solving biological problems such as Protein folding , function prediction and Phylogeny . Computational neuroscience  Computational modelling of neurophysiology . Software engineering  edit  Main article Outline of software engineering Formal methods  Mathematical approaches for describing and reasoning about software design. Software engineering  The principles and practice of designing, developing, and testing programs, as well as proper engineering practices. Algorithm design  Using ideas from algorithm theory to creatively design solutions to real tasks. Computer programming  The practice of using a programming language to implement algorithms. Humancomputer interaction  The study and design of computer interfaces that people use. Reverse engineering  The application of the scientific method to the understanding of arbitrary existing software. Theory of computation  edit  Main article Theory of computation Automata theory  Different logical structures for solving problems. Computability theory  What is calculable with the current models of computers. Proofs developed by Alan Turing and others provide insight into the possibilities of what may be computed and what may not. List of unsolved problems in computer science Computational complexity theory  Fundamental bounds especially time and storage space on classes of computations. Quantum computing theory  Explores computational models involving quantum superposition of bits. History  edit  History of computer science List of pioneers in computer science Professions  edit  Programmer Teacher  Professor Software engineer Software architect Software developer Software tester Hardware engineer Data analyst Interaction designer Network administrator Data and data structures  edit  Data structure Data type Associative array and Hash table Array List Tree String Matrix computer science Database Programming paradigms  edit  Imperative programming  Procedural programming Functional programming Logic programming Object oriented programming Class Inheritance Object See also  edit  Computer science portal Abstraction Big O notation Closure Compiler Cognitive science External links  edit  Computer science at Wikipedias sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Wikimedia Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Outline of computer science at Curlie ACM report on a recommended computer science curriculum 2008 Directory of free university lectures in Computer Science Collection of Computer Science Bibliographies Photographs of computer scientists  Bertrand Meyer s gallery v t e Computer science Note This template roughly follows the 2012 ACM Computing Classification System . Hardware Printed circuit board Peripheral Integrated circuit Very Large Scale Integration Systems on Chip SoCs Energy consumption Green computing Electronic design automation Hardware acceleration Computer systems organization Computer architecture Embedded system Real-time computing Dependability Networks Network architecture Network protocol Network components Network scheduler Network performance evaluation Network service Software organization Interpreter Middleware Virtual machine Operating system Software quality Software notations and tools Programming paradigm Programming language Compiler Domain-specific language Modeling language Software framework Integrated development environment Software configuration management Software library Software repository Software development Software development process Requirements analysis Software design Software construction Software deployment Software maintenance Programming team Open-source model Theory of computation Model of computation Formal language Automata theory Computational complexity theory Logic Semantics Algorithms Algorithm design Analysis of algorithms Algorithmic efficiency Randomized algorithm Computational geometry Mathematics of computing Discrete mathematics Probability Statistics Mathematical software Information theory Mathematical analysis Numerical analysis Information systems Database management system Information storage systems Enterprise information system Social information systems Geographic information system Decision support system Process control system Multimedia information system Data mining Digital library Computing platform Digital marketing World Wide Web Information retrieval Security Cryptography Formal methods Security services Intrusion detection system Hardware security Network security Information security Application security Humancomputer interaction Interaction design Social computing Ubiquitous computing Visualization Accessibility Concurrency Concurrent computing Parallel computing Distributed computing Multithreading Multiprocessing Artificial intelligence Natural language processing Knowledge representation and reasoning Computer vision Automated planning and scheduling Search methodology Control method Philosophy of artificial intelligence Distributed artificial intelligence Machine learning Supervised learning Unsupervised learning Reinforcement learning Multi-task learning Cross-validation Graphics Animation Rendering Image manipulation Graphics processing unit Mixed reality Virtual reality Image compression Solid modeling Applied computing E-commerce Enterprise software Computational mathematics Computational physics Computational chemistry Computational biology Computational social science Computational engineering Computational healthcare Digital art Electronic publishing Cyberwarfare Electronic voting Video games Word processing Operations research Educational technology Document management Book Category Portal Outline WikiProject Commons v t e Wikipedia Outlines General reference Culture and the arts Geography and places Health and fitness History and events Mathematics and logic Natural and physical sciences People and self Philosophy and thinking Religion and belief systems Society and social sciences Technology and applied sciences Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleOutline_of_computer_science oldid911765784  Categories  Outlines of sciences Wikipedia outlines Computer science Computing-related lists Hidden categories Articles with short description Articles with Curlie links