Project stakeholder From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia    Redirected from Project stakeholders  Jump to navigation Jump to search According to the Project Management Institute PMI, the term project stakeholder refers to, an individual, group, or organization, who may affect, be affected by, or perceive itself to be affected by a decision, activity, or outcome of a project Project Management Institute, 2013. ISO 21500 uses a similar definition. Project stakeholders are entities that have an interest in a given project. These stakeholders may be inside or outside an organization which sponsor a project, or have an interest or a gain upon a successful completion of a project may have a positive or negative influence in the project completion. The following are examples of project stakeholders Project leader Senior management Project team members Project customer Resource Managers Line Managers Product user group Project testers Any group impacted by the project as it progresses Any group impacted by the project when it is completed Subcontractors to the project Consultants to the project Rather than focusing on one subset of stakeholders, Lynda Bourne 1  advocates prioritizing all stakeholders and focusing your attention on the most important at this point in time. Her view of importance encompasses an assessment of the power, proximity and urgency associated with each stakeholder. She calls her methodology a Stakeholder Circle. 2  The rationale for this emphasis on decision makers is part of project stakeholder management and a key component in affecting change in an organization. John Kotter describes stakeholder analysis and stakeholder management as essential components of change management . 3  See also  edit  Stakeholder register Citations  edit   Stakeholder Relationship Management  Bourne, Lynda. Project Relationship Management and the Stakeholder Circle PDF Thesis. .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Yvette 28 November 2011. Applying Kotters Change Management Principles to Project Management . Change Leadership Network. Archived from the original on 13 July 2015. Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help  References  edit  Project Management Institute 2013 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge PMBOK Guide, Fifth Edition, Newtown Square, PA, USA Project Management Institute, p. 589. ISBN   978-1935589679 Freeman RE 1984 Strategic Management a Stakeholder Approach. Pitman Series in Business and Public Policy, Harpercollins College Div First Edition, 275 p. ISBN   978-0273019138 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleProject_stakeholder oldid859496092  Categories  Corporate finance Project management Buzzword Hidden categories CS1 errors deprecated parameters