System dynamics From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Dynamic stock and flow diagram of model New product adoption model from article by John Sterman 2001 System dynamics  SD  is an approach to understanding the nonlinear behaviour of complex systems over time using stocks, flows , internal feedback loops , table functions and time delays. 1  2  Contents 1 Overview 2 History 3 Topics in systems dynamics 3.1 Causal loop diagrams 3.2 Stock and flow diagrams 3.3 Equations 3.4 Equations in discrete time 3.4.1 Dynamic simulation results 3.5 Equations in continuous time 4 Application 4.1 Example 4.2 Example of piston motion 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Overview  edit  System dynamics is a methodology and mathematical modeling technique to frame, understand, and discuss complex issues and problems. Originally developed in the 1950s to help corporate managers improve their understanding of industrial processes, SD is currently being used throughout the public and private sector for policy analysis and design. 3  Convenient graphical user interface GUI system dynamics software developed into user friendly versions by the 1990s and have been applied to diverse systems. SD models solve the problem of simultaneity mutual causation by updating all variables in small time increments with positive and negative feedbacks and time delays structuring the interactions and control. The best known SD model is probably the 1972 The Limits to Growth . This model forecast that exponential growth of population and capital, with finite resource sources and sinks and perception delays, would lead to economic collapse during the 21st century under a wide variety of growth scenarios. System dynamics is an aspect of systems theory as a method to understand the dynamic behavior of complex systems. The basis of the method is the recognition that the structure of any system, the many circular, interlocking, sometimes time-delayed relationships among its components, is often just as important in determining its behavior as the individual components themselves. Examples are chaos theory and social dynamics . It is also claimed that because there are often properties-of-the-whole which cannot be found among the properties-of-the-elements, in some cases the behavior of the whole cannot be explained in terms of the behavior of the parts. History  edit  System dynamics was created during the mid-1950s 4  by Professor Jay Forrester of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology . In 1956, Forrester accepted a professorship in the newly formed MIT Sloan School of Management . His initial goal was to determine how his background in science and engineering could be brought to bear, in some useful way, on the core issues that determine the success or failure of corporations. Forresters insights into the common foundations that underlie engineering, which led to the creation of system dynamics, were triggered, to a large degree, by his involvement wi th managers at General Electric GE during the mid-1950s. At that time, the managers at GE were perplexed because employment at their appliance plants in Kentucky exhibited a significant three-year cycle. The business cycle was judged to be an insufficient explanation for the employment instability. From hand simulations or calculations of the stock-flow-feedback structure of the GE plants, which included the existing corporate decision-making structure for hiring and layoffs, Forrester was able to show how the instability in GE employment was due to the internal structure of the firm and not t o an external force such as the business cycle. These hand simulations were the start of the field of system dynamics. 3  During the late 1950s and early 1960s, Forrester and a team of graduate students moved the emerging field of system dynamics from the hand-simulation stage to the formal computer modeling stage. Richard Bennett created the first system dynamics computer modeling language called SIMPLE Simulation of Industrial Management Problems with Lots of Equations in the spring of 1958. In 1959, Phyllis Fox and Alexander Pugh wrote the first version of DYNAMO DYNAmic MOdels, an improved version of SIMPLE, and the system dynamics language became the industry standard for over thirty years. Forrester published the first, and still classic, book in the field titled Industrial Dynamics in 1961. 3  From the late 1950s to the late 1960s, system dynamics was applied almost exclusively to corporatemanagerial problems. In 1968, however, an unexpected occurrence caused the field to broaden beyond corporate modeling. John F. Collins , the former mayor of Boston, was appointed a visiting professor of Urban Affairs at MIT. The result of the Collins-Forrester collaboration was a book titled Urban Dynamics . The Urban Dynamics model presented in the book was the first major non-corporate application of system dynamics. 3  The second major noncorporate application of system dynamics came shortly after the first. In 1970, Jay Forrester was invited by the Club of Rome to a meeting in Bern, Switzerland. The Club of Rome is an organization devoted to solving what its members describe as the predicament of mankindthat is, the global crisis that may appear sometime in the future, due to the demands being placed on the Earths carrying capacity its sources of renewable and nonrenewable resources and its sinks for the disposal of pollutants by the worlds exponentially growing population. At the Bern meeting, Forrester was asked if system dynamics could be used to address the predicament of mankind. His answer, of course, was that it could. On the plane back from the Bern meeting, Forrester created the first draft o f a system dynamics model of the worlds socioeconomic system. He called this model WORLD1. Upon his return to the United States, Forrester refined WORLD1 in preparation for a visit to MIT by members of the Club of Rome. Forrester called the refined version of the model WORLD2. Forrester published WORLD2 in a book titled World Dynamics . 3  Topics in systems dynamics  edit  The elements of system dynamics diagrams are feedback, accumulation of flows into stocks and time delays. As an illustration of the use of system dynamics, imagine an organisation that plans to introduce an innovative new durable consumer product. The organisation needs to understand the possible market dynamics in order to design marketing and production plans. Causal loop diagrams  edit  Main article Causal loop diagram In the system dynamics methodology, a problem or a system e.g., ecosystem, political system or mechanical system may be represented as a causal loop diagram . 5  A causal loop diagram is a simple map of a system with all its constituent components and their interactions. By capturing interactions and consequently the feedback loops see figure below, a causal loop diagram reveals the structure of a system. By understanding the structure of a system, it becomes possible to ascertain a systems behavior over a certain time period. 6  The causal loop diagram of the new product introduction may look as follows Causal loop diagram of New product adoption model There are two feedback loops in this diagram. The positive reinforcement labeled R loop on the right indicates that the more people have already adopted the new product, the stronger the word-of-mouth impact. There will be more references to the product, more demonstrations, and more reviews. This positive feedback should generate sales that continue to grow. The second feedback loop on the left is negative reinforcement or balancing and hence labeled B. Clearly, growth cannot continue forever, because as more and more people adopt, there remain fewer and fewer potential adopters. Both feedback loops act simultaneously, but at different times they may have different strengths. Thus one might expect growing sales in the initial years, and then declining sales in the later years. However, in general a causal loop diagram does not specify the structure of a system sufficiently to permit determination of its behavior from the visual representation alone. 7  Stock and flow diagrams  edit  Main article Stock and flow Causal loop diagrams aid in visualizing a systems structure and behavior, and analyzing the system qualitatively. To perform a more detailed quantitative analysis, a causal loop diagram is transformed to a stock and flow diagram. A stock and flow model helps in studying and analyzing the system in a quantitative way such models are usually built and simulated using computer software. A stock is the term for any entity that accumulates or depletes over time. A flow is the rate of change in a stock. A flow is the rate of accumulation of the stock In our example, there are two stocks Potential adopters and Adopters. There is one flow New adopters. For every new adopter, the stock of potential adopters declines by one, and the stock of adopters increases by one. Stock and flow diagram of New product adoption model Equations  edit  The real power of system dynamics is utilised through simulation. Although it is possible to perform the modeling in a spreadsheet , there are a variety of software packages that have been optimised for this. The steps involved in a simulation are Define the problem boundary Identify the most important stocks and flows that change these stock levels Identify sources of information that impact the flows Identify the main feedback loops Draw a causal loop diagram that links the stocks, flows and sources of information Write the equations that determine the flows Estimate the parameters and initial conditions. These can be estimated using statistical methods, expert opinion, market research data or other relevant sources of information. 8  Simulate the model and analyse results. In this example, the equations that change the two stocks via the flow are   Potential adopters   0 t -New adopters   d t displaystyle  mboxPotential adoptersint _0tmbox-New adopters ,dt   Adopters   0 t New adopters   d t displaystyle  mboxAdoptersint _0tmboxNew adopters ,dt Equations in discrete time  edit  List of all the equations in discrete time , in their order of execution in each year, for years 1 to 15   1    Probability that contact has not yet adopted  Potential adopters   Potential adopters     Adopters  displaystyle 1 mboxProbability that contact has not yet adoptedmboxPotential adoptersmboxPotential adopters mbox Adopters 2    Imitators  q  Adopters  Probability that contact has not yet adopted displaystyle 2 mboxImitatorsqcdot mboxAdopterscdot mboxProbability that contact has not yet adopted 3    Innovators  p  Potential adopters displaystyle 3 mboxInnovatorspcdot mboxPotential adopters 4    New adopters  Innovators  Imitators displaystyle 4 mboxNew adoptersmboxInnovatorsmboxImitators 4.1    Potential adopters     New adopters   displaystyle 4.1 mboxPotential adopters -mboxNew adopters  4.2    Adopters     New adopters   displaystyle 4.2 mboxAdopters mboxNew adopters    p  0.03 displaystyle  p0.03   q  0.4 displaystyle  q0.4 Dynamic simulation results  edit  The dynamic simulation results show that the behaviour of the system would be to have growth in adopters that follows a classic s-curve shape. The increase in adopters is very slow initially, then exponential growth for a period, followed ultimately by saturation. Dynamic stock and flow diagram of New product adoption model Stocks and flows values for years  0 to 15 Equations in continuous time  edit  To get intermediate values and better accuracy, the model can run in continuous time we multiply the number of units of time and we proportionally divide values that change stock levels. In this example we multiply the 15 years by 4 to obtain 60 trimesters, and we divide the value of the flow by 4. Dividing the value is the simplest with the Euler method , but other methods could be employed instead, such as RungeKutta methods . List of the equations in continuous time for trimesters  1 to 60   They are the same equations as in the section Equation in discrete time above, except equations 4.1 and 4.2 replaced by following   10    Valve New adopters    New adopters  T i m e S t e p displaystyle 10 mboxValve New adopters mboxNew adopterscdot TimeStep 10.1    Potential adopters     Valve New adopters displaystyle 10.1 mboxPotential adopters -mboxValve New adopters 10.2    Adopters     Valve New adopters   displaystyle 10.2 mboxAdopters mboxValve New adopters    T i m e S t e p  1  4 displaystyle  TimeStep14 In the below stock and flow diagram, the intermediate flow Valve New adopters calculates the equation     Valve New adopters    New adopters    T i m e S t e p displaystyle  mboxValve New adopters mboxNew adopters cdot TimeStep Dynamic stock and flow diagram of New product adoption model in continuous time Application  edit  System dynamics has found application in a wide range of areas, for example population , agriculture 9  , ecological and economic systems, which usually interact strongly with each other. System dynamics have various back of the envelope management applications. They are a potent tool to Teach system thinking 10  reflexes to persons being coached Analyze and compare assumptions and mental models about the way things work Gain qualitative insight into the workings of a system or the consequences of a decision Recognize archetypes of dysfunctional systems in everyday practice Computer software is used to simulate a system dynamics model of the situation being studied. Running what if simulations to test certain policies on such a model can greatly aid in understanding how the system changes over time. System dynamics is very similar to systems thinking and constructs the same causal loop diagrams of systems with feedback. However, system dynamics typically goes further and utilises simulation to study the behaviour of systems and the impact of alternative policies. 11  System dynamics has been used to investigate resource dependencies, and resulting problems, in product development. 12  13  A system dynamics approach to macroeconomics , known as Minsky , has been developed by the economist Steve Keen . 14  This has been used to successfully model world economic behaviour from the apparent stability of the Great Moderation to the sudden unexpected Financial crisis of 200708 . Example  edit  Causal loop diagram of a model examining the growth or decline of a life insurance company. 15  The figure above is a causal loop diagram of a system dynamics model created to examine forces that may be responsible for the growth or decline of life insurance companies in the United Kingdom . A number of this figures features are worth mentioning. The first is that the models negative feedback loops are identified by Cs , which stand for Counteracting loops. The second is that double slashes are used to indicate places where there is a significant delay between causes i.e., variables at the tails of arrows and effects i.e., variables at the heads of arrows. This is a common causal loop diagramming convention in system dynamics. Third, is that thicker lines are used to identify the feedback loops and links that author wi shes the audience to focus on. This is also a common system dynamics diagramming convention. Last, it is clear that a decision maker would find it impossible to think through the dynamic behavior inherent in the model, from inspection of the figure alone. 15  Example of piston motion  edit  Objective study of a crank-connecting rod system. We want to model a crank-connecting rod system through a system dynamic model. Two different full descriptions of the physical system with related systems of equations can be found here in English and here in French  they give the same results. In this example, the crank, with variable radius and angular frequency, will drive a piston with a variable connecting rod length. System dynamic modeling the system is now modeled, according to a stock and flow system dynamic logic. The figure below shows the stock and flow diagram Stock and flow diagram for crank-connecting rod system Simulation the behavior of the crank-connecting rod dynamic system can then be simulated. The next figure is a 3D simulation created using procedural animation . Variables of the model animate all parts of this animation crank, radius, angular frequency, rod length, and piston position. 3D procedural animation of the crank-connecting rod system modeled in 2 See also  edit  Related subjects Causal loop diagram Ecosystem model Plateau Principle System archetypes System Dynamics Society Twelve leverage points Viable system phenomena Wicked problems World3 Population dynamics Predator-prey interaction Related fields Dynamical systems theory Grey box model Operations research Social dynamics System identification Systems theory Systems thinking TRIZ Related scientists Bruce Hannon Jay Forrester Dennis Meadows Donella Meadows Peter Senge Graeme Snooks John Sterman Systems science portal Comparison of system dynamics software References  edit   F. H. A. Rahim, N. N. Hawari and N. Z. Abidin, Supply and demand of rice in Malaysia A system dynamics approach, International Journal of Supply Chain and Management, Vol.6, No.4, pp. 234-240, 2017.  MIT System Dynamics in Education Project SDEP  a b c d e Michael J. Radzicki and Robert A. Taylor 2008. Origin of System Dynamics Jay W. Forrester and the History of System Dynamics . In U.S. Department of Energys Introduction to System Dynamics . Retrieved 23 October 2008.  Forrester, Jay 1971. Counterintuitive behavior of social systems. Technology Review 733 5268  Sterman, John D. 2000. Business Dynamics Systems Thinking and Modeling for a Complex World. New York McGraw  Meadows, Donella. 2008. Thinking in Systems A Primer. Earthscan  Richardson, G. P. 1986, Problems with causal-loop diagrams. Syst. Dyn. Rev., 2 158170. doi10.1002sdr.4260020207  Sterman, John D. 2001. System dynamics modeling Tools for learning in a complex world. California Management Review . 43 4 825. doi  10.230741166098 . JSTOR   41166098 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  F. H. A. Rahim, N. N. Hawari and N. Z. Abidin, Supply and demand of rice in Malaysia A system dynamics approach, International Journal of Supply Chain and Management, Vol.6, No.4, pp. 234-240, 2017.  OK Google delete all third-party Manipulating Third-Party Data, Beginning Google Maps Applications with PHP and Ajax , Apress, 2006, pp.  97118, doi  10.1007978-1-4302-0224-0_5 , ISBN   9781590597071  System Dynamics Society  Repenning, Nelson P. 2001. Understanding fire fighting in new product development. The Journal of Product Innovation Management . 18 5 285300. doi  10.1016S0737-67820100099-6 .  Nelson P. Repenning 1999. Resource dependence in product development improvement efforts , MIT Sloan School of Management Department of Operations ManagementSystem Dynamics Group, Dec 1999.    1  Minsky  -  Project of the month January 2014. Interview with Minsky development team. Accessed January 2014  a b Michael J. Radzicki and Robert A. Taylor 2008. Feedback . In U.S. Department of Energys Introduction to System Dynamics . Retrieved 23 October 2008. Further reading  edit  Forrester, Jay W. 1961. Industrial Dynamics . Pegasus Communications. ISBN   978-1-883823-36-8 . Forrester, Jay W. 1969. Urban Dynamics . Pegasus Communications. ISBN   978-1-883823-39-9 . Meadows, Donella H. 1972. Limits to Growth . New York University books. ISBN   978-0-87663-165-2 . Morecroft, John 2007. Strategic Modelling and Business Dynamics A Feedback Systems Approach . John Wiley  Sons. ISBN   978-0-470-01286-4 . Roberts, Edward B. 1978. Managerial Applications of System Dynamics . Cambridge MIT Press. ISBN   978-0-262-18088-7 . Randers, Jorgen 1980. Elements of the System Dynamics Method . Cambridge MIT Press. ISBN   978-0-915299-39-3 . Senge, Peter 1990. The Fifth Discipline . Currency. ISBN   978-0-385-26095-4 . Sterman, John D. 2000. Business Dynamics Systems thinking and modeling for a complex world . McGraw Hill. ISBN   978-0-07-231135-8 . External links  edit  Wikimedia Commons has media related to systems dynamics . System Dynamics Society Study Prepared for the U.S. Department of Energys Introducing System Dynamics - Desert Island Dynamics An Annotated Survey of the Essential System Dynamics Literature v t e Systems science Systems types Anatomical Art Biological Complex Complex adaptive Conceptual Coupled humanenvironment Database Dynamical Ecological Economic Energy Formal Holarchic Information Legal Measurement Metric Multi-agent Nervous Nonlinear Operating Physical Planetary Political Sensory Social Star Writing Concepts Doubling time Leverage points Limiting factor Negative feedback Positive feedback Theoretical fields Chaos theory Complex systems Control theory Cybernetics Earth system science Living systems Sociotechnical system Systemics Urban metabolism World-systems theory Analysis Biology Dynamics Ecology Engineering Neuroscience Pharmacology Psychology Theory Thinking Systems scientists Alexander Bogdanov Russell L. Ackoff William Ross Ashby Ruzena Bajcsy Bla H. Bnthy Gregory Bateson Anthony Stafford Beer Richard E. Bellman Ludwig von Bertalanffy Margaret Boden Kenneth E. Boulding Murray Bowen Kathleen Carley Mary Cartwright C. West Churchman Manfred Clynes George Dantzig Edsger W. Dijkstra Fred Emery Heinz von Foerster Stephanie Forrest Jay Wright Forrester Barbara Grosz Charles A.  S. Hall Lydia Kavraki James J. Kay Faina M. Kirillova George Klir Allenna Leonard Edward Norton Lorenz Niklas Luhmann Humberto Maturana Margaret Mead Donella Meadows Mihajlo D. Mesarovic James Grier Miller Radhika Nagpal Howard T. Odum Talcott Parsons Ilya Prigogine Qian Xuesen Anatol Rapoport Peter Senge Claude Shannon Katia Sycara Eric Trist Francisco Varela Manuela M. Veloso Kevin Warwick Norbert Wiener Jennifer Wilby Anthony Wilden Applications Systems theory in anthropology Systems theory in archaeology Systems theory in political science Organizations List Principia Cybernetica Category Portal Commons v t e Systems engineering Subfields Aerospace engineering Biological systems engineering Configuration management Earth systems engineering and management Electrical engineering Enterprise systems engineering Performance engineering Reliability engineering Safety engineering Processes Requirements engineering Functional specification System integration Verification and validation Design review Concepts Business process System System lifecycle V-Model Systems development life cycle Tools Decision-making Function modelling IDEF Optimization Quality function deployment System dynamics Systems Modeling Language Systems analysis Systems modeling Work breakdown structure People James S. Albus Ruzena Bajcsy Benjamin S. Blanchard Wernher von Braun Kathleen Carley Harold Chestnut Wolt Fabrycky Barbara Grosz Arthur David Hall III Derek Hitchins Robert E. Machol Radhika Nagpal Simon Ramo Joseph Francis Shea Katia Sycara Manuela M. Veloso John N. Warfield Related fields Control engineering Computer engineering Industrial engineering Operations research Project management Quality management Risk management Software engineering Category v t e Energy modeling Models ACEGES iNEMS MARKAL NEMS POLES Open data OpenEI Reegle Lists Open energy system databases Open energy system models Concepts Climate change mitigation scenarios Computer simulation Energy modeling Mathematical optimization Scenario analysis System dynamics Applications Electricity market Electric power transmission Energy market Energy planning Energy policy Integrated assessment modelling People Hartmut Bossel Mark Jacobson John Laitner John Weyant Organizations Energy Modeling Forum Openmod Initiative Categories Economics models Energy models Authority control GND  4058802-6 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSystem_dynamics oldid889846122  Categories  Complex systems theory Operations research Problem structuring methods Scientific modeling Systems theory Hidden categories Articles with French-language external links Commons category link is locally defined Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers