Writing From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia    Redirected from Write  This is the latest accepted revision , reviewed on 8 September 2019 . Jump to navigation Jump to search Write redirects here. For other uses, see Write disambiguation . Representation of language in a textual medium The Rosetta Stone , with writing in three different scripts, was instrumental in deciphering Ancient Egyptian. Writing is a medium of human communication that represents language with signs and symbols. For languages that utilize a writing system, inscriptions can complement spoken language by creating a durable version of speech that can be stored for future reference or transmitted across distance. Writing, in other words, is not a language, but a tool used to make languages readable. Within a language system, writing relies on many of the same structures as speech, such as vocabulary , grammar , and semantics , with the added dependency of a system of signs or symbols. The result of writing is called text , and the recipient of text is called a reader . H.G. Wells argued that writing has the ability to put agreements, laws, commandments on record. It made the growth of states larger than the old city states possible. It made a continuous historical consciousness possible. The command of the priest or king and his seal could go far beyond his sight and voice and could survive his death. 1  As human societies emerged, collective motivations for the development of writing were driven by pragmatic exigencies like keeping history, maintaining culture , codifying knowledge through curricula and lists of texts deemed to contain foundational knowledge e.g., The Canon of Medicine  or artistically exceptional e.g., a literary canon , organizing and governing societies through the formation of legal systems , census records, contracts , deeds of ownership, taxation , trade agreements , treaties , and so on. For example, around the 4th millennium BC, the complexity of trade and administration in Mesopotamia outgrew human memory, and writing became a more dependable method of recording and presenting transactions in a permanent form. 2  In both ancient Egypt and Mesoamerica , on the other hand, writing may have evolved through calendric and political necessities for recording historical and environmental events. Individual motivations for writing include improvised additional capacity for the limitations of human memory e.g., to-do lists, recipes , reminders, logbooks, maps, the proper sequence for a complicated task or important ritual, dissemination of ideas as in an essay , monograph , broadside , petition , or manifesto , imaginative narratives and other forms of storytelling , personal or business correspondence , and lifewriting e.g., a diary or journal. Contents 1 Writing systems 1.1 Logographies 1.2 Syllabaries 1.3 Alphabets 1.3.1 Abjads 1.3.2 Abugidas 1.4 Featural scripts 1.5 Historical significance of writing systems 1.6 Tools and materials 2 History 2.1 Mesopotamia 2.2 Egypt 2.3 Elamite scripts 2.3.1 Cretan and Greek scripts 2.4 China 2.5 Indus Valley 2.6 Central Asia 2.7 Phoenician writing system and descendants 2.8 Mesoamerica 2.9 South America 2.10 Dacia 3 Modern importance 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Writing systems  edit  The major writing systems methods of inscriptionbroadly fall into five categories logographic , syllabic , alphabetic , featural , and ideographic symbols for ideas. A sixth category, pictographic , is insufficient to represent language on its own, but often forms the core of logographies. Logographies  edit  Comparative evolution from pictograms to abstract shapes, in Mesopotamian cuneiforms , Egyptian hieroglyphs and Chinese characters . A logogram is a written character which represents a word or morpheme . A vast number of logograms are needed to write Chinese characters , cuneiform , and Mayan , where a glyph may stand for a morpheme, a syllable, or bothlogoconsonantal in the case of hieroglyphs. Many logograms have an ideographic component Chinese radicals, hieroglyphic determiners. For example, in Mayan, the glyph for fin, pronounced ka, was also used to represent the syllable ka whenever the pronunciation of a logogram needed to be indicated, or when there was no logogram. In Chinese, about 90 of characters are compounds of a semantic meaning element called a radical with an existing character to indicate the pronunciation, called a phonetic . However, such phonetic elements complement the logographic elements, rather than vice versa. The main logographic system in use today is Chinese characters , used with some modification for the various languages or dialects of China , Japan , and sometimes in Korean despite the fact that in South and North Korea , the phonetic Hangul system is mainly used. Syllabaries  edit  A syllabary is a set of written symbols that represent or approximate syllables . A glyph in a syllabary typically represents a consonant followed by a vowel, or just a vowel alone, though in some scripts more complex syllables such as consonant-vowel-consonant, or consonant-consonant-vowel may have dedicated glyphs. Phonetically related syllables are not so indicated in the script. For instance, the syllable ka may look nothing like the syllable ki, nor will syllables with the same vowels be similar. Syllabaries are best suited to languages with a relatively simple syllable structure, such as Japanese. Other languages that use syllabic writing include the Linear B script for Mycenaean Greek  Sequoyan , 3  Ndjuka , an English-based creole language of Surinam  and the Vai script of Liberia . Most logographic systems have a strong syllabic component. Ethiopic , though technically an abugida , has fused consonants and vowels together to the point where it is learned as if it were a syllabary. Alphabets  edit  See also History of the alphabet An alphabet is a set of symbols, each of which represents or historically represented a phoneme of the language. In a perfectly phonological alphabet, the phonemes and letters would correspond perfectly in two directions a writer could predict the spelling of a word given its pronunciation, and a speaker could predict the pronunciation of a word given its spelling. As languages often evolve independently of their writing systems, and writing systems have been borrowed for languages they were not designed for, the degree to which letters of an alphabet correspond to phonemes of a language varies greatly from one language to another and even within a single language. Abjads  edit  In most of the writing systems of the Middle East, it is usually only the consonants of a word that are written, although vowels may be indicated by the addition of various diacritical marks. Writing systems based primarily on marking the consonant phonemes alone date back to the hieroglyphs of ancient Egypt. Such systems are called abjads , derived from the Arabic word for alphabet. Abugidas  edit  In most of the alphabets of India and Southeast Asia, vowels are indicated through diacritics or modification of the shape of the consonant. These are called abugidas . Some abugidas, such as Ethiopic and Cree , are learned by children as syllabaries, and so are often called syllabics. However, unlike true syllabaries, there is not an independent glyph for each syllable. Sometimes the term alphabet is restricted to systems with separate letters for consonants and vowels, such as the Latin alphabet , although abugidas and abjads may also be accepted as alphabets. Because of this use, Greek is often considered to be the first alphabet. Featural scripts  edit  A featural script notates in an internally consistent way the building blocks of the phonemes that make up a language. For instance, all sounds pronounced with the lips labial sounds may have some element in common. In the Latin alphabet, this is accidentally the case with the letters b and p however, labial m is completely dissimilar, and the similar-looking q and d are not labial. In Korean hangul , however, all four labial consonants are based on the same basic element, but in practice, Korean is learned by children as an ordinary alphabet, and the featural elements tend to pass unnoticed. Another featural script is SignWriting , the most popular writing system for many sign languages , where the shapes and movements of the hands and face are represented iconically . Featural scripts are also common in fictional or invented systems, such as J.R.R. Tolkien s Tengwar . Historical significance of writing systems  edit  Olin Levi Warner , tympanum representing Writing, above exterior of main entrance doors, Thomas Jefferson Building , Washington DC, 1896. Historians draw a sharp distinction between prehistory and history, with history defined by the advent of writing. The cave paintings and petroglyphs of prehistoric peoples can be considered precursors of writing, but they are not considered true writing because they did not represent language directly. Writing systems develop and change based on the needs of the people who use them. Sometimes the shape, orientation, and meaning of individual signs changes over time. By tracing the development of a script, it is possible to learn about the needs of the people who used the script as well as how the script changed over time. Tools and materials  edit  See also writing implements The many tools and writing materials used throughout history include stone tablets , clay tablets , bamboo slats, papyrus , wax tablets , vellum , parchment , paper , copperplate , styluses , quills , ink brushes , pencils , pens , and many styles of lithography . The Incas used knotted cords known as quipu or khipu for keeping records. 4  The typewriter and various forms of word processors have subsequently become widespread writing tools, and various studies have compared the ways in which writers have framed the experience of writing with such tools as compared with the pen or pencil. 5  6  7  8  9  History  edit  Main articles Proto-writing , List of languages by first written accounts , and History of writing Mesopotamia  edit  While neolithic writing is a current research topic, conventional history assumes that the writing process first evolved from economic necessity in the ancient Near East. Writing most likely began as a consequence of political expansion in ancient cultures, which needed reliable means for transmitting information, maintaining financial accounts, keeping historical records, and similar activities. Around the 4th millennium BC, the complexity of trade and administration outgrew the power of memory, and writing became a more dependable method of recording and presenting transactions in a permanent form. 2  The invention of the first writing systems is roughly contemporary with the beginning of the Bronze Age of the late 4th millennium BC . The Sumerian archaic cuneiform script and the Egyptian hieroglyphs are generally considered the earliest writing systems, both emerging out of their ancestral proto-literate symbol systems from 3400 to 3200 BC with earliest coherent texts from about 2600 BC . It is generally agreed that Sumerian writing was an independent invention however, it is debated whether Egyptian writing was developed completely independently of Sumerian, or was a case of cultural diffusion . Globular envelope with a cluster of accountancy tokens, Uruk period, from Susa . Louvre Museum Archaeologist Denise Schmandt-Besserat determined the link between previously uncategorized clay tokens, the oldest of which have been found in the Zagros region of Iran, and the first known writing, Mesopotamian cuneiform . 10  In approximately 8000 BC, the Mesopotamians began using clay tokens to count their agricultural and manufactured goods. Later they began placing these tokens inside large, hollow clay containers bulla, or globular envelopes which were then sealed. The quantity of tokens in each container came to be expressed by impressing, on the containers surface, one picture for each instance of the token inside. They next dispensed with the tokens, relying solely on symbols for the tokens, drawn on clay surfaces. To avoid making a picture for each instance of the same object for example 100 pictures of a hat to represent 100 hats, they counted the objects by using various small marks. In this way the Sumerians added a system for enumerating objects to their incipient syste m of symbols. The original Mesopotamian writing system was derived around 3200 BC from this method of keeping accounts. By the end of the 4th millennium BC, 11  the Mesopotamians were using a triangular-shaped stylus pressed into soft clay to record numbers. This system was gradually augmented with using a sharp stylus to indicate what was being counted by means of pictographs . Round-stylus and sharp-stylus writing was gradually replaced by writing using a wedge-shaped stylus hence the term cuneiform , at first only for logograms , but by the 29th century BC also for phonetic elements. Around 2700 BC, cuneiform began to represent syllables of spoken Sumerian . About that time, Mesopotamian cuneiform became a general purpose writing system for logograms, syllables, and numbers. This script was adapted to another Mesopotamian language, the East Semitic Akkadian  Assyrian and Babylonian  around 2600 BC, and then to others such as Elamite , Hattian , Hurrian and Hittite . Scripts similar in appearance to this writing system include those for Ugaritic and Old Persian . With the adoption of Aramaic as the lingua franca of the Neo-Assyrian Empire 911609 BC, Old Aramaic was also adapted to Mesopotamian cuneiform. The last cuneiform scripts in Akkadian discovered thus far date from the 1st century AD. Egypt  edit  Narmer Palette , with the two serpopards representing unification of Upper and Lower Egypt , circa 3100 B.C. The earliest known hieroglyphic date back to the second half of the 4th millennium BC, such as the clay labels of a Predynastic ruler called Scorpion I Naqada IIIA period, c. 32nd century BC recovered at Abydos modern Umm el-Qaab in 1998 or the Narmer Palette , dating to c. 3100 BC, and several recent discoveries that may be slightly older, though these glyphs were based on a much older artistic rather than written tradition. The hieroglyphic script was logographic with phonetic adjuncts that included an effective alphabet . The worlds oldest deciphered sentence was found on a seal impression found in the tomb of Seth-Peribsen at Umm el-Qaab, which dates from the Second Dynasty 28th or 27th century BC. There are around 800 hieroglyphs dating back to the Old Kingdom, Middle Kingdom and New Kingdom Eras. By the Greco-Roman period, there are more than 5,000. Writing was very important in maintaining the Egyptian empire, and literacy was concentrated among an educated elite of scribes . Only people from certain backgrounds were allowed to train to become scribes, in the service of temple, pharaonic, and military authorities. The hieroglyph system was always difficult to learn, but in later centuries was purposely made even more so, as this preserved the scribes status. The worlds oldest known alphabet appears to have been developed by Canaanite turquoise miners in the Sinai desert around the mid-19th century BC. 12  Around 30 crude inscriptions have been found at a mountainous Egyptian mining site known as Serabit el-Khadem. This site was also home to a temple of Hathor, the Mistress of turquoise. A later, two line inscription has also been found at Wadi el-Hol in Central Egypt. Based on hieroglyphic prototypes, but also including entirely new symbols, each sign apparently stood for a consonant rather than a word the basis of an alphabetic system. It was not until the 12th to 9th centuries, however, that the alphabet took hold and became widely used. Elamite scripts  edit  Over the centuries, three distinct Elamite scripts developed. Proto-Elamite is the oldest known writing system from Iran. In use only for a brief time c. 32002900 BC, clay tablets with Proto-Elamite writing have been found at different sites across Iran. The Proto-Elamite script is thought to have developed from early cuneiform proto-cuneiform. The Proto-Elamite script consists of more than 1,000 signs and is thought to be partly logographic . Linear Elamite is a writing system attested in a few monumental inscriptions in Iran. It was used for a very brief period during the last quarter of the 3rd millennium BC. It is often claimed that Linear Elamite is a syllabic writing system derived from Proto-Elamite, although this cannot be proven since Linear-Elamite has not been deciphered. Several scholars have attempted to decipher the script, most notably Walther Hinz and Piero Meriggi . The Elamite cuneiform script was used from about 2500 to 331 BC, and was adapted from the Akkadian cuneiform . The Elamite cuneiform script consisted of about 130 symbols, far fewer than most other cuneiform scripts. Cretan and Greek scripts  edit  Further information Cretan hieroglyphs , Linear A , and Linear B Cretan hieroglyphs are found on artifacts of Crete early-to-mid-2nd millennium BC, MM I to MM III, overlapping with Linear A from MM IIA at the earliest. Linear B , the writing system of the Mycenaean Greeks , 13  has been deciphered while Linear A has yet to be deciphered. The sequence and the geographical spread of the three overlapping, but distinct writing systems can be summarized as follows 13  A 1  Cretan hieroglyphs were used in Crete from c. 1625 to 1500 BC Linear A was used in the Aegean Islands  Kea , Kythera , Melos , Thera , and the Greek mainland  Laconia  from c. 18th century to 1450 BC and Linear B was used in Crete  Knossos , and mainland  Pylos , Mycenae , Thebes , Tiryns  from c. 1375 to 1200 BC. China  edit  Further information Oracle bone script and Bronzeware script The earliest surviving examples of writing in Chinainscriptions on so-called  oracle bones , tortoise plastrons and ox scapulae used for divinationdate from around 1200 BC in the late Shang dynasty . A small number of bronze inscriptions from the same period have also survived. 14  Historians have found that the type of media used had an effect on what the writing was documenting and how it was used.  citation needed  In 2003, archaeologists reported discoveries of isolated tortoise-shell carvings dating back to the 7th millennium BC, but whether or not these symbols are related to the characters of the later oracle-bone script is disputed. 15  16  Indus Valley  edit  Main article Indus script Indus script refers to short strings of symbols associated with the Indus Valley Civilization which spanned modern-day Pakistan and North India  used between 2600 and 1900 BC. In spite of many attempts at decipherments and claims, it is as yet undeciphered. The term Indus script is mainly applied to that used in the mature Harappan phase, which perhaps evolved from a few signs found in early Harappa after 3500 BC, 17  and was followed by the mature Harappan script. The script is written from right to left, 18  and sometimes follows a boustrophedonic style. Since the number of principal signs is about 400600, 19  midway between typical logographic and syllabic scripts, many scholars accept the script to be logo-syllabic 20  typically syllabic scripts have about 50100 signs whereas logographic scripts have a very large number of principal signs. Several scholars maintain that structural analysis indicates that an agglutinative language underlies the script. Central Asia  edit  In 2001, archaeologists discovered that there was a civilization in Central Asia that used writing c. 2000 BC. An excavation near Ashgabat , the capital of Turkmenistan , revealed an inscription on a piece of stone that was used as a stamp seal. 21  Phoenician writing system and descendants  edit  The Proto-Sinaitic script, in which Proto-Canaanite is believed to have been first written, is attested as far back as the 19th century BC. The Phoenician writing system was adapted from the Proto-Canaanite script sometime before the 14th century BC, which in turn borrowed principles of representing phonetic information from Egyptian hieroglyphs . This writing system was an odd sort of syllabary in which only consonants are represented. This script was adapted by the Greeks , who adapted certain consonantal signs to represent their vowels. The Cumae alphabet , a variant of the early Greek alphabet, gave rise to the Etruscan alphabet and its own descendants, such as the Latin alphabet and Runes . Other descendants from the Greek alphabet include Cyrillic , used to write Bulgarian , Russian and Serbian , among others. The Phoenician system was also adapted into the Aramaic script , from which the Hebrew and the Arabic scripts are descended. The Tifinagh script Berber languages is descended from the Libyco-Berber script, which is assumed to be of Phoenician origin. Mesoamerica  edit  A stone slab with 3,000-year-old writing, known as the Cascajal Block , was discovered in the Mexican state of Veracruz and is an example of the oldest script in the Western Hemisphere, preceding the oldest Zapotec writing by approximately 500 years. 22  23  24  It is thought to be Olmec . Of several pre-Columbian scripts in Mesoamerica , the one that appears to have been best developed, and the only one to be deciphered, is the Maya script . The earliest inscription identified as Maya dates to the 3rd century BC. 25  Maya writing used logograms complemented by a set of syllabic glyphs, somewhat similar in function to modern Japanese writing. South America  edit  The Incas had no known script. Their quipu system of recording informationbased on knots tied along one or many linked cordswas apparently used for inventory and accountancy purposes and could not encode textual information. 26  Dacia  edit  Three stone slabs were found by Romanian archaeologist Nicolae Vlassa , in the mid-20th century 1961 in Trtria present-day Alba County , Transylvania , Romania , ancient land of Dacia , inhabited by Dacians, which were a population who may have been related to the Getaes and Thracians . One of the slabs contains 4 groups of pictographs divided by lines. Some of the characters are also found in Ancient Greek , as well as in Phoenician , Etruscan , Old Italic and Iberian . The origin and the timing of the writings are disputed, because there are no precise evidence in situ , the slabs cannot be carbon dated, because of the bad treatment of the Cluj museum. There are indirect carbon dates found on a skeleton discovered near the slabs, that certifies the 53005500 BC period. Modern importance  edit  In many parts of the world, writing has become an even more important part of daily life as digital technologies have helped connect individuals from across the globe through systems such as e-mail and social media . Such technologies have brought substantial amounts of routine reading and writing into most modern workplaces. 27  In the United States, for example, the ability to read and write is necessary for most jobs, and multiple programs are in place to aid both children and adults in improving their literacy skills. For example, the emergence of the writing center and community-wide literacy councils aim to help students and community members sharpen their writing skills. These resources, and many more, span across different age groups in order to offer each individual a better understanding of their language and how to express themselves via writing in order to perhaps improve their socioeconomic status . Other parts of the world have seen an increase in writing abilities as a result of programs such as the World Literacy Foundation and International Literacy Foundation , as well as a general push for increased global communication. See also  edit  Writing portal Asemic writing Author Boustrophedon text Calligraphy Collaborative writing Communication Composition language Composition studies Copyright Clause Creative writing Decipherment Dyslexia Essay Fiction writing Foreign language writing aid Graphonomics Handwriting Interactive fiction Journalism Kishtenketsu Linguistics List of writers conferences Literacy Literary award Literary criticism Literary festival Literature Manuscript Mechanical pencil Orthography Peer critique Pencil Printing Publishing Creation of the Sequoyah syllabary Scriptorium Story bible Speech communication Teaching Writing in the United States Textual scholarship Typography White papers Word processing Writer Writers block Writing bump Writing circle Writing in space Writing slate Writing style Writing systems Writers voice Notes  edit   Beginning date refers to first attestations, the assumed origins of all scripts lie further back in the past. References  edit   Wells, H. G. 1922. A Short History of the World . p.  41. .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  a b Robinson 2003 , p.  36.  Cushman, Ellen 2011. The Cherokee Syllabary A Writing System in its Own Right. Written Communication . 28.3  255281.  The Khipu Database Project .  Chandler, Daniel 1990. Do the write thing. Electric Word . 17  2730.  Chandler, Daniel 1992. The phenomenology of writing by hand. Intelligent Tutoring Media . 3 23 6574. doi  10.108014626269209408310 .  Chandler, Daniel 1993. Writing strategies and writers tools. English Today The International Review of the English Language . 9 2 3238. doi  10.1017S0266078400000341 .  Chandler, Daniel 1994. Who needs suspended inscription. Computers and Composition . 11 3 191201. doi  10.10168755-46159490012-4 .  Chandler, Daniel 1995. The Act of Writing A Media Theory Approach . Aberystwyth Prifysgol Cymru.  Rudgley, Richard 2000. The Lost Civilizations of the Stone Age . New York Simon  Schuster. pp.  4857.  The Origin and Development of the Cuneiform System of Writing, Samuel Noah Kramer, Thirty Nine Firsts in Recorded History pp. 381383  Goldwasser, Orly. How the Alphabet Was Born from Hieroglyphs, Biblical Archaeology Review, MarApr 2010  a b Olivier 1986 , pp.  377f.  citation not found   Boltz, William 1999. Language and Writing. In Loewe, Michael Shaughnessy, Edward L. eds.. The Cambridge History of Ancient China . Cambridge Cambridge University Press. pp.  74123. ISBN   978-0-521-47030-8 .  Archaeologists Rewrite History . China Daily . 12 June 2003 . Retrieved 4 January 2012 .  Rincon, Paul 17 April 2003.   Earliest writing found in China . BBC News . Retrieved 4 January 2012 . Signs carved into 8,600-year-old tortoise shells found in China may be the earliest written words, say archaeologists  Whitehouse, David 1999.  Earliest writing found  BBC  Lal 1966  Wells 1999  Bryant 2000  Ancient writing found in Turkmenistan . BBC. 15 May 2001 . Retrieved 30 March 2008 . A previously unknown civilisation was using writing in Central Asia 4,000 years ago, hundreds of years before Chinese writing developed, archaeologists have discovered. An excavation near Ashgabat, the capital of Turkmenistan, revealed an inscription on a piece of stone that seems to have been used as a stamp seal.  Wilford, John Noble 15 September 2006. Writing May Be Oldest in Western Hemisphere . New York Times . Retrieved 30 March 2008 . A stone slab bearing 3,000-year-old writing previously unknown to scholars has been found in the Mexican state of Veracruz, and archaeologists say it is an example of the oldest script ever discovered in the Western Hemisphere.  Briggs, Helen 14 September 2006.   Oldest New World writing found . BBC . Retrieved 30 March 2008 . Ancient civilisations in Mexico developed a writing system as early as 900 BC, new evidence suggests.  Rodrguez Martnez, Maria del Carmen et al. 2006. Oldest Writing in the New World . Science . 313 5793 16101614. Bibcode  2006Sci...313.1610R . doi  10.1126science.1131492 . PMID   16973873 . Retrieved 30 March 2008 . A block with a hitherto unknown system of writing has been found in the Olmec heartland of Veracruz, Mexico. Stylistic and other dating of the block places it in the early first millennium before the common era, the oldest writing in the New World, with features that firmly assign this pivotal development to the Olmec civilization of Mesoamerica.  Saturno, William A. David Stuart Boris Beltrn 3 March 2006. Early Maya Writing at San Bartolo, Guatemala. Science . 311 5765 12811283. Bibcode  2006Sci...311.1281S . doi  10.1126science.1121745 . PMID   16400112 .  Domenici, viviano Domenici, Davide.   Talking Knots of Inka . archive.archaeology.org . Archaeological Institute of America . Retrieved 8 September 2019 .  Brandt, Deborah 2015. The Rise of Writing . Cambridge UP. ISBN   978-1-107-46211-3 . Further reading  edit  A History of Writing From Hieroglyph to Multimedia, edited by Anne-Marie Christin, Flammarion in French, hardcover 408 pages, 2002, ISBN   2-08-010887-5  In the Beginning A Short History of the Hebrew Language. By Joel M. Hoffman, 2004. Chapter 3 covers the invention of writing and its various stages. Origins of writing on AncientScripts.com Museum of Writing  UK Museum of Writing with information on writing history and implements On ERIC Digests Writing Instruction Current Practices in the Classroom  Writing Development  Writing Instruction Changing Views over the Years Angioni, Giulio , La scrittura, una fabrilit semiotica , in Fare, dire, sentire. Lidentico e il diverso nelle culture , il Maestrale, 2011, 149169. ISBN   978-88-6429-020-1 Children of the Code The Power of Writing   Online Video Powell, Barry B. 2009. Writing Theory and History of the Technology of Civilization, Oxford Blackwell. ISBN   978-1-4051-6256-2 Reynolds, Jack 2004. Merleau-Ponty And Derrida Intertwining Embodiment And Alterity , Ohio University Press Rogers, Henry. 2005. Writing Systems A Linguistic Approach. Oxford Blackwell. ISBN   0-631-23463-2 hardcover ISBN   0-631-23464-0 paperback Ankerl, Guy 2000 2000. Global communication without universal civilization . INU societal research. Vol.1 Coexisting contemporary civilizations Arabo-Muslim, Bharati, Chinese, and Western. Geneva INU Press. pp.  5966, 235s. ISBN   978-2-88155-004-1 . Robinson, Andrew 2003. The Origins of Writing. In Crowley, David Heyer, Paul eds.. Communication in History Technology, Culture, Society . Allyn and Bacon. Falkenstein, A. 1965 Zu den Tafeln aus Tartaria. Germania 43, 269273 Haarmann, H. 1990 Writing from Old Europe. The Journal of Indo-European Studies 17 Lazarovici, Gh., Fl. Drasovean  Z. Maxim 2000 The Eagle   the Bird of death, regeneration resurrection and messenger of Gods. Archaeological and ethnological problems. Tibiscum, 5768 Lazarovici, Gh., Fl. Drasovean  Z. Maxim 2000 The Eye   Symbol, Gesture, Expression.Tibiscum, 115128 Makkay, J. 1969 The Late Neolithic Tordos Group of Signs. Alba Regia 10, 950 Makkay, J. 1984 Early Stamp Seals in South-East Europe. Budapest Masson, E. 1984 Lcriture dans les civilisations danubiennes nolithiques. Kadmos 23, 2, 89123. Berlin  New York. Maxim, Z. 1997 Neo-eneoliticul din Transilvania. Bibliotheca Musei Napocensis 19. Cluj-Napoca Milojcic, Vl. 1963 Die Tontafeln von Tartaria Siebenbrgen, und die Absolute Chronologie des mitteleeuropischen Neolithikums.Germania 43, 266268 Paul, I. 1990 Mitograma de acum 8 milenii. Atheneum 1, p.  28 Paul, I. 1995 Vorgeschichtliche untersuchungen in Siebenburgen. Alba Iulia Vlassa, N. 1962  Studia UBB 2, 2330. Vlassa, N. 1962  Dacia 7, 485494 Vlassa, N. 1965  Atti UISPP, Roma 1965, 267269 Vlassa, N. 1976 Contribuii la Problema racordrii Neoliticul Transilvaniei, p.  2843, fig. 7-8 Vlassa, N. 1976 Neoliticul Transilvaniei. Studii, articole, note. Bibliotheca Musei Napocensis 3. Cluj-Napoca Winn, Sham M. M. 1973 The Sings of the Vinca Culture Winn, Sham M. M. 1981 Pre-writing in Southeast Europe The Sign System of the Vinca culture. BAR Merlini, Marco 2004 La scrittura  natta in Europa, Roma 2004 Merlini, Marco and Gheorghe Lazarovici 2008 Luca, Sabin Adrian ed. Settling discovery circumstances, dating and utilization of the Trtria Tablets Merlini, Marco and Gheorghe Lazarovici 2005 New archaeological data referring to Trtria tablets, in Documenta Praehistorica XXXII, Department of Archeology Faculty of Arts, University of Ljubljana. Ljubljana20052019. External links  edit  Wikiquote has quotations related to Writing Wikimedia Commons has media related to People writing . Wikiversity has learning resources about Collaborative play writing Wikibooks has a book on the topic of Fiction technique Look up writing in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Language, Writing and Alphabet An Interview with Christophe Rico Damqatum 3 2007 Signs  Books  Networks, virtual exhibition of the German Museum of Books and Writing i.a. with a thematic module on sounds, symbols and script Pictopen Modern written communication based on pictograms v t e Writing  Writing material Enduring Plant based Palm leaf  Borassus  Ola leaf  Corypha umbraculifera  Birch bark  Betula  Papyrus  Cyperus papyrus  Bamboo and wooden slips Paper Amate Trema micrantha Ficus aurea Parabaik  Streblus asper  Samut khoi  S. asper  Kraing  Morus bark  Other materials Clay tablet Wax tablet Metals Stamping Intaglio Stone Animal skin Parchment Vellum Oracle bone Silk text Textile printing Geoglyph Ink Photographic film Impermanent Electronic paper Screen Skywriting Carrier objects Inscription Bas-relief Scroll Manuscript Palimpsest Codex Book Sign Microform Electronic media Related topics Writing systems History of writing List of writing systems v t e Paper data storage media Antiquity Writing on papyrus c. 3000 BCE Paper 105 CE Modern Index card 1640s Punched tape mid-1800s Punched card 1880s Edge-notched card 1904 Optical mark recognition 1930s Barcode 1948 v t e Communication studies History Outline Topics and terminology Biocommunication Broadcasting Communication Computer-mediated communication Conversation History of communication Information Intercultural   Interpersonal   Intrapersonal communication Journalism Mass media Meaning Media ecology Meta-communication Models of communication New media Nonverbal communication Propaganda Reading Speech Symbol Telecommunication Text and conversation theory Writing Subfields Communication design Communication theory Communicology Crisis communication Cross-cultural communication Development communication Discourse analysis Environmental communication Global communication Health communication International communication Mass communication Media studies Mediated cross-border communication Organizational communication Political communication Risk communication Science communication Technical communication Visual communication Closed-loop communication Scholars Adorno Barthes Bateson Benjamin Burke Castells Chomsky Craig Fisher Flusser Gasset Gerbner Goffman Habermas Horkheimer Huxley Innis Jakobson Janis Johnson Kincaid Lippman Luhmann Marcuse McLuhan Mead Morgan Ong Packard Peirce Postman Quebral Richards Rogers Schramm Tankard Tannen Wertheimer Category Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleWriting oldid914547715  Categories  Writing Nonverbal communication Human communication Language Hidden categories All articles with broken links to citations Wikipedia pending changes protected pages Articles with short description Use dmy dates from January 2018 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2013 CS1 long volume value Commons category link is locally defined