Programming team From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .  Learn how and when to remove these template messages  This article needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources   Programming team     news    newspapers    books    scholar    JSTOR  March 2019   Learn how and when to remove this template message  This article needs to be updated . In particular Sources are dated for this topic other teams exist and should be explored with references. Please update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.  March 2019   Learn how and when to remove this template message  A programming team is a team of people who develop or maintain computer software . 1  They may be organised in numerous ways, but the egoless programming team and chief programmer team have been common structures. 2  Contents 1 Description 2 Programming team structures 2.1 Egoless programming 2.2 Chief programmer team 2.3 Shared workstation teams 2.3.1 Pair programming 2.3.2 Mob programming 3 Programming Models 3.1 Waterfall Model 3.2 Agile Model 4 See also 5 References Description  edit  A programming team comprises people who develop or maintain computer software . 3  Programming team structures  edit  Programming teams may be organised in numerous ways, but the egoless programming team and chief programmer team are two common structures typically used. 2  The main determinants when choosing the programming team structure typically include difficulty, size, duration, modularity, reliability, time, and sociability. 2  Egoless programming  edit  Main article Egoless programming An egoless programming team contains groups of ten or fewer programmers. Code is exchanged and goals are set amongst the group members. Leadership is rotated within the group according to the needs and abilities required during a specific time. The lack of structure in the egoless team can result in a weakness of efficiency, effectiveness, and error detection for large-scale pr ojects. Egoless programming teams work best for tasks that are very complex. Individuals that are a part of a decentralized programming team report higher job satisfaction. 2  Chief programmer team  edit  Main article Chief programmer team A chief programmer team will usually contain three-person teams consisting of a chief programmer, senior level programmer, and a program librarian. Additional programmers and analysts are added to the team when necessary. The weaknesses of this structure include a lack of communication across team members, task cooperation, and complex task completion. The chief programmer team works best for tasks that are simpler and straightforward since the flow of information in the team is limited. Individuals that work in this team structure typically report lower work morale. 2  Shared workstation teams  edit  Pair programming  edit  Main article Pair programming A development technique where two programmers work together at one workstation. Mob programming  edit  Main article Mob programming A software development approach where the whole team works on the same thing, at the same time, in the same space, and at the same computer. Programming Models  edit  Programming models allow software development teams to develop, deploy, and test projects using these different methodologies. Waterfall Model  edit  Main article Waterfall model The waterfall model, noted as the more traditional 4  approach, is a linear model of production. The sequence of events of this methodology follows as Gather and document requirements Design Code and unit test Perform system testing Perform user acceptance testing UAT Fix any issues Deliver the finished product Each stage is distinct during the software development process, and each stage generally finishes before the next one can begin. Programming teams using this model are able to design the project early on in the development process allowing teams to focus on coding and testing during the bulk of the work instead of constantly reiterating design. This also allows teams to design completely and more carefully so that teams can have a complete understanding of all software deliverables . Agile Model  edit  Main article Agile software development The Agile development model is a more team-based approach to development 4  then the previous waterfall model. Teams work in rapid deliverydeployment which splits work into phases called sprints. Sprints are usually defined as two weeks of planned software deliverables given to each teamteam member. After each sprint, work is reprioritized and the information learned from the previous sprint is used for future sprint planning. As the sprint work is complete, it can be reviewed and evaluated by the programming team and sent back for another iteration i.e. next sprint or closed if completed. The general principles 5  of the Agile Manifesto 6  are as follows Satisfy the customer and continually develop software. Changing requirements are embraced for the customers competitive advantage. Concentrate on delivering working software frequently. Delivery preference will be placed on the shortest possible time span. Developers and business people must work together throughout the entire project. Projects must be based on people who are motivated. Give them the proper environment and the support that they need. They should be trusted to get their jobs done. Face-to-face communication is the best way to transfer information to and from a team. Working software is the primary measurement of progress. Agile processes will promote development that is sustainable. Sponsors, developers, and users should be able to maintain an indefinite, constant pace. Constant attention to technical excellence and good design will enhance agility. Simplicity is considered to be the art of maximizing the work that is not done, and it is essential. Self-organized teams usually create the best designs. At regular intervals, the team will reflect on how to become more effective, and they will tune and adjust their behavior accordingly. See also  edit  Cross-functional team Scrum software development Software development process Team software process References  edit   Jack Belzer, Albert George Holzman, Allen Kent October 1, 1979, Encyclopedia of computer science and technology , 13 CS1 maint multiple names authors list  link  .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  a b c d e Marilyn Mantei March 1981. The Effect of Programming Team Structures on Programming Tasks PDF . Communications of the ACM . Vol.  24 no.  3. p.  106113 . Retrieved 2019-03-26 .  Jack Belzer, Albert George Holzman, Allen Kent , Encyclopedia of computer science and technology , 13 CS1 maint multiple names authors list  link   a b Mary Lotz July 5, 2018, Waterfall vs. Agile Which is the Right Development Methodology for Your Project  Linchpin SEO Team March 26, 2019, A Beginners Guide To The Agile Method  Scrums  Principles behind the Agile Manifesto . 2019-06-11. v t e Software engineering Fields Computer programming Requirements engineering Software deployment Software design Software maintenance Software testing Systems analysis Formal methods Concepts Data modeling Enterprise architecture Functional specification Modeling language Orthogonality Programming paradigm Software Software archaeology Software architecture Software configuration management Software development methodology Software development process Software quality Software quality assurance Software verification and validation Structured analysis Orientations Agile Aspect-oriented Object orientation Ontology Service orientation SDLC Models Developmental Agile EUP Executable UML Incremental model Iterative model Prototype model RAD UP Scrum Spiral model V-Model Waterfall model XP Other SPICE CMMI Data model ER model Function model Information model Metamodeling Object model Systems model View model Languages IDEF UML USL SysML Software engineers Victor Basili Kent Beck Grady Booch Fred Brooks Barry Boehm Peter Chen Danese Cooper Ward Cunningham Tom DeMarco Edsger W. Dijkstra Delores M. Etter Martin Fowler Adele Goldstine Margaret Hamilton C. A. R. Hoare Lois Haibt Mary Jean Harrold Grace Hopper Watts Humphrey Michael A. Jackson Ivar Jacobson Alan Kay Nancy Leveson Stephen J. Mellor Bertrand Meyer David Parnas Trygve Reenskaug Winston W. Royce James Rumbaugh Mary Shaw Peri Tarr Elaine Weyuker Niklaus Wirth Edward Yourdon Related fields Computer science Computer engineering Project management Risk management Systems engineering Category Commons Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleProgramming_team oldid901632326  Categories  Software project management Hidden categories CS1 maint multiple names authors list Articles needing additional references from March 2019 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles in need of updating from March 2019 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Articles with multiple maintenance issues