PortalEngineering From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Portal maintenance status June 2018 This portals subpages should be checked . Subpages that are no longer needed should be reported here . Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software . Learn how to update the maintenance information here . .mw-parser-output .portal-column-leftfloatleftwidth50.mw-parser-output .portal-column-rightfloatrightwidth49.mw-parser-output .portal-column-left-widefloatleftwidth60.mw-parser-output .portal-column-right-narrowfloatrightwidth39.mw-parser-output .portal-column-left-extra-widefloatleftwidth70.mw-parser-output .portal-column-right-extra-narrowfloat rightwidth29media only screen and max-width800px.mw-parser-output .portal-column-left,.mw-parser-output .portal-column-right,.mw-parser-output .portal-column-left-wide,.mw-parser-output .portal-column-right-narrow,.mw-parser-output .portal-column-left-extra-wide,.mw-parser-output .portal-column-right-extra-narrowfloatinheritwidthinherit Wikipedias portal for exploring content related to Engineering Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal Portals  Technology  Engineering Introduction The InSight lander with solar panels deployed in a cleanroom Engineering is the use of scientific principles to design and build machines, structures, and other items, including bridges, roads, vehicles, and buildings. The discipline of engineering encompasses a broad range of more specialized fields of engineering , each with a more specific emphasis on particular areas of applied mathematics , applied science , and types of application. See glossary of engineering . The term engineering is derived from the Latin ingenium , meaning cleverness and ingeniare , meaning to contrive, devise. Read more... Show new selections Selected article The Hanford Site is a mostly decommissioned nuclear production complex operated by the United States federal government on the Columbia River in the U.S. state of Washington . The site has been known by many names, including Hanford Project , Hanford Works , Hanford Engineer Works and Hanford Nuclear Reservation . Established in 1943 as part of the Manhattan Project in Hanford , south-central Washington, the site was home to the B Reactor , the first full-scale plutonium production reactor in the world. Plutonium manufactured at the site was used in the first nuclear bomb , tested at the Trinity site , and in Fat Man , the bomb detonated over Nagasaki , Japan. During the Cold War , the project expanded to include nine nuclear reactors and five large plutonium processing complexes, which produced plutonium for most of the more than 60,000  weapons in the U.S. nuclear arsenal . Nuclear technology developed rapidly during this period, and Hanford scientists produced major technological achievements. Many early safety procedures and waste disposal practices were inadequate, and government documents have confirmed that Hanfords operations released significant amounts of radioactive materials into the air and the Columbia River. More selected articles... Read more... Selected image In metalworking , casting means a process, in which liquid metal is poured into a mold , that contains a hollow cavity of the desired shape, and then allowed to cool and solidify. The solidified part is also known as a casting, which is ejected or broken out of the mold to complete the process. Casting is most often used for making complex shapes that would be difficult or uneconomical to make by other methods. Casting processes have been known for thousands of years, and widely used for sculpture , especially in bronze , jewellery in precious metals , and weapons and tools. Traditional techniques include lost-wax casting , plaster mold casting and sand casting . The modern casting process is subdivided into two main categories expendable and non-expendable casting. It is further broken down by the mold material, such as sand or metal, and pouring method, such as gravity, vacuum, or low pressure. More selected pictures...   Read more... Did you know ... that the first automobile powered by an internal combustion engine was built in 1807 ... that any temperature difference will power a Stirling engine  ... that a Floppy Disk Controller is a special-purpose chip and associated circuitry that directs and controls reading from and writing to a computers floppy disk drive ... that a drillship is a maritime vessel that has been fitted with drilling apparatus Other Did you know facts... Articles Major branches of Engineering Aerospace  Agricultural  Automation engineering  Biomedical  Chemical  Civil  Computer  Electrical  Electronic  Energy engineering  Engineering physics  Engineering Management  Environmental  Industrial  Information  Mining  Mineral Processing  Manufacturing  Mechanical  Mechatronics  Petroleum  Software  Structural  More Featured articles on Engineering Subcategories CategoryEngineering Main Categories Engineering competitions  Engineering concepts  Engineering disciplines  Engineering failures  Engineering literature  Engineering societies  Engineers  Engines  History of engineering  Measuring instruments  Science and engineering awards  Standards  Systems theory  More WikiProjects WikiProject Engineering WikiProject Chemical and Bio Engineering  WikiProject Civil Engineering  WikiProject Computer Science  WikiProject Computing  WikiProject Electronics  WikiProject Energy  WikiProject Metalworking  WikiProject Transport  More Technology WikiProjects  More Science WikiProjects  WikiProject Engineering WikiProject Engineering Navigation Main page  Discussions  Project templates  Assessment  Portal  Things you can do Engineering pages in need of attention A sampling of stubs you can improve Applied mechanics  Work hardening  Hydraulic engineering  Prefabrication  Defect tracking  Process theory  Experimental reliability  Quenching  Seam welding You might also find engineering stubs here Industry stubs  Tool stubs  Science stubs  Chemistry stubs  Biochemistry stubs  Technology stubs  Computing stubs  Electronics stubs  Aircraft stubs  Standards and measurement stubs Related portals Technology Transport Science Energy Bridges Electronics Infrastructure Aviation Cars Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews   News Wikiquote   Quotations Wikisource   Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wiktionary   Definitions Wikidata   Database v t e Engineering Civil Architectural Construction Environmental Earthquake Geotechnical Hydraulic Mining Structural Transportation Mechanical Acoustical Aerospace Automotive Marine Railway Thermal Electrical Computer Control Electromechanics Electronics Microwaves Power Radio Frequency Telecommunications Chemical Biochemical Biological Molecular Petroleum Process Reaction Interdisciplinary Audio Biomedical Engineering mathematics Engineering mechanics Engineering physics Engineering science Fire Industrial Information Materials science Ceramics Metallurgy Polymer Mechatronics Military Nanotechnology Nuclear Optical Photonics Privacy Robotics Sanitary Security Software Systems Glossaries Engineering Aerospace engineering Civil engineering Electrical and electronics engineering Mechanical engineering Structural engineering List of engineering branches CategoryEngineering Engineering portal What are portals  List of portals Sub-pages of PortalEngineering Purge server cache Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitlePortalEngineering oldid898551124  Categories  Engineering portal Technology portals Engineering Hidden categories Portals with untriaged subpages from June 2018 All portals with untriaged subpages All portals Portals with no named maintainer Portals with short description Random portal component with 2630 available subpages Random portal component with 4150 available image subpages Random portal component with less than 2 available subpages