Network service From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Application running at the network application layer and above This article is about services provided by and to networked computers. For information about Internet connections, see Network service provider . For a hierarchical list of network services, see CategoryNetwork service . This article does not cite any sources . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .  December 2009   Learn how and when to remove this template message  In computer networking, a network service is an application running at the network application layer and above, that provides data storage, manipulation, presentation, communication or other capability which is often implemented using a client-server or peer-to-peer architecture based on application layer network protocols . 1  Each service is usually provided by a server component running on one or more computers often a dedicated server computer offering multiple services and accessed via a network by client components running on other devices. However, the client and server components can both be run on the same machine. Clients and servers will often have a user interface , and sometimes other hardware associated with it. Contents 1 Examples 2 Application layer 2.1 TCP-IP network services 2.1.1 Port numbers 2.2 TCP versus UDP 3 See also 4 References Examples  edit  Examples are the Domain Name System DNS which translates domain names to Internet protocol IP addresses and the Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol DHCP to assign networking configuration information to network hosts. Authentication servers identify and authenticate users, provide user account profiles, and may log usage statistics. E-mail , printing and distributed network file system services are common services on local area networks . They require users to have permissions to access the shared resources. Other network services include Directory services e-Mail File sharing Instant messaging Online game Printing File server Voice over IP Video on demand Video telephony World Wide Web Simple Network Management Protocol Time service Wireless sensor network Application layer  edit  Main article Application layer Internet protocol suite Application layer BGP DHCP DNS FTP HTTP HTTPS IMAP LDAP MGCP MQTT NNTP NTP POP ONCRPC RTP RTSP RIP SIP SMTP SNMP SSH Telnet TLSSSL XMPP more... Transport layer TCP UDP DCCP SCTP RSVP more... Internet layer IP IPv4 IPv6 ICMP ICMPv6 ECN IGMP IPsec more... Link layer ARP NDP OSPF Tunnels L2TP PPP MAC Ethernet Wi-Fi DSL ISDN FDDI more... v t e OSI model by layer 7.   Application layer NNTP SIP SSI DNS FTP Gopher HTTP NFS NTP SMPP SMTP SNMP Telnet DHCP Netconf more.... 6.   Presentation layer MIME XDR ASN.1 5.   Session layer Named pipe NetBIOS SAP PPTP RTP SOCKS SPDY 4.   Transport layer TCP UDP SCTP DCCP SPX 3.   Network layer IP IPv4 IPv6 ICMP IPsec IGMP IPX AppleTalk X.25 PLP 2.   Data link layer ATM ARP IS-IS SDLC HDLC CSLIP SLIP GFP PLIP IEEE 802.2 LLC MAC L2TP IEEE 802.3 Frame Relay ITU-T G.hn DLL PPP X.25   LAPB Q.922 LAPF 1.   Physical layer EIATIA-232 EIATIA-449 ITU-T V-Series I.430 I.431 PDH SONETSDH PON OTN DSL IEEE 802.3 IEEE 802.11 IEEE 802.15 IEEE 802.16 IEEE 1394 ITU-T G.hn PHY USB Bluetooth RS-232 RS-449 v t e In computer network programming , the application layer is an abstraction layer reserved for communications protocols and methods designed for process-to-process communications across an Internet Protocol IP computer network . Application layer protocols use the underlying transport layer protocols to establish host-to-host connections for network services. TCP-IP network services  edit  Port numbers  edit  Main article List of TCP and UDP port numbers Many Internet Protocol-based services are associated with a particular well-known port number which is standardized by the Internet technical governance. For example, World-Wide-Web servers operate on port 80, and email relay servers usually listen on port 25. TCP versus UDP  edit  Different services use different packet transmission techniques. In general, packets that must get through in the correct order, without loss, use TCP, whereas real time services where later packets are more important than older packets use UDP. For example, file transfer requires complete accuracy and so is normally done using TCP, and audio conferencing is frequently done via UDP, where momentary glitches may not be noticed. UDP lacks built-in network congestion avoidance and the protocols that use it must be extremely carefully designed to prevent network collapse. See also  edit  Internet hosting service Web hosting service DNS hosting service E-mail hosting service References  edit   Network Service . SDxCentral . 12 June 2015. Archived from the original html on 12 June 2015 . Retrieved 4 August 2019 . Network Service  a capability that facilitates a network operation. It typically is provided by a server which can be running one or more services, based on network protocols running at the application layer in the Open Systems Interconnection OSI model of the network. .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em v t e Computer science Note This template roughly follows the 2012 ACM Computing Classification System . Hardware Printed circuit board Peripheral Integrated circuit Very Large Scale Integration Systems on Chip SoCs Energy consumption Green computing Electronic design automation Hardware acceleration Computer systems organization Computer architecture Embedded system Real-time computing Dependability Networks Network architecture Network protocol Network components Network scheduler Network performance evaluation Network service Software organization Interpreter Middleware Virtual machine Operating system Software quality Software notations and tools Programming paradigm Programming language Compiler Domain-specific language Modeling language Software framework Integrated development environment Software configuration management Software library Software repository Software development Software development process Requirements analysis Software design Software construction Software deployment Software maintenance Programming team Open-source model Theory of computation Model of computation Formal language Automata theory Computational complexity theory Logic Semantics Algorithms Algorithm design Analysis of algorithms Algorithmic efficiency Randomized algorithm Computational geometry Mathematics of computing Discrete mathematics Probability Statistics Mathematical software Information theory Mathematical analysis Numerical analysis Information systems Database management system Information storage systems Enterprise information system Social information systems Geographic information system Decision support system Process control system Multimedia information system Data mining Digital library Computing platform Digital marketing World Wide Web Information retrieval Security Cryptography Formal methods Security services Intrusion detection system Hardware security Network security Information security Application security Humancomputer interaction Interaction design Social computing Ubiquitous computing Visualization Accessibility Concurrency Concurrent computing Parallel computing Distributed computing Multithreading Multiprocessing Artificial intelligence Natural language processing Knowledge representation and reasoning Computer vision Automated planning and scheduling Search methodology Control method Philosophy of artificial intelligence Distributed artificial intelligence Machine learning Supervised learning Unsupervised learning Reinforcement learning Multi-task learning Cross-validation Graphics Animation Rendering Image manipulation Graphics processing unit Mixed reality Virtual reality Image compression Solid modeling Applied computing E-commerce Enterprise software Computational mathematics Computational physics Computational chemistry Computational biology Computational social science Computational engineering Computational healthcare Digital art Electronic publishing Cyberwarfare Electronic voting Video games Word processing Operations research Educational technology Document management Book Category Portal Outline WikiProject Commons Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleNetwork_service oldid910034906  Categories  Network service Hidden categories Articles with short description Articles lacking sources from December 2009 All articles lacking sources