Resin From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search See also Synthetic resins Cedar of Lebanon cone showing flecks of resin as used in the mummification of Egyptian Pharaohs . Insect trapped in resin In polymer chemistry and materials science , resin is a solid or highly viscous substance of plant or synthetic origin that is typically convertible into polymers . 1  Resins are usually mixtures of organic compounds . This article focuses on naturally-occurring resins. Plants secrete resins for their protective benefits in response to injury. The resin protects the plant from insects and pathogens. 2  Resins confound a wide range of herbivores, insects, and pathogens, while the volatile phenolic compounds may attract benefactors such as parasitoids or predators of the herbivores that attack the plant. 3  Contents 1 Composition 1.1 Examples 1.2 Rosin 1.3 Petroleum- and insect-derived resins 2 History and etymology 2.1 Non-resinous exudates 3 Uses 3.1 Plant resins 3.2 Synthetic resins 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Composition  edit  Most plant resins are composed of terpenes. Specific components are alpha-pinene , beta-pinene , delta-3 carene , and sabinene , the monocyclic terpenes limonene and terpinolene , and smaller amounts of the tricyclic sesquiterpenes , longifolene , caryophyllene , and delta-cadinene . Some resins also contain a high proportion of resin acids . Rosins on the other hand are less volatile and consist, inter alia, of diterpenes.  citation needed  Examples  edit  Notable examples of plant resins include amber , Balm of Gilead , balsam , Canada balsam , Boswellia , copal from trees of Protium copal and Hymenaea courbaril , dammar gum from trees of the family Dipterocarpaceae , Dragons blood from the dragon trees  Dracaena species, elemi , frankincense from Boswellia sacra , galbanum from Ferula gummosa , gum guaiacum from the lignum vitae trees of the genus Guaiacum , kauri gum from trees of Agathis australis , hashish Cannabis resin from Cannabis indica , labdanum from mediterranean species of Cistus , mastic plant resin from the mastic tree Pistacia lentiscus , myrrh from shrubs of Commiphora , sandarac resin from Tetraclinis articulata , the national tree of Malta, styrax a Benzoin resin from various Styrax species, spinifex resin from Australian grasses, and turpentine , distilled from pine resin. Amber is fossil resin also called resinite from coniferous and other tree species. Copal, kauri gum, dammar and other resins may also be found as subfossil deposits. Subfossil copal can be distinguished from genuine fossil amber because it becomes tacky when a drop of a solvent such as acetone or chloroform is placed on it. 4  African copal and the kauri gum of New Zealand are also procured in a semi-fossil condition. Rosin  edit  See also Rosin Extremely viscous resin extruding from the trunk of a mature Araucaria columnaris . Solidified resin from which the volatile terpenes have been removed by distillation is known as rosin . Typical rosin is a transparent or translucent mass, with a vitreous fracture and a faintly yellow or brown colour, non-odorous or having only a slight turpentine odor and taste. Rosin is insoluble in water, mostly soluble in alcohol, essential oils , ether , and hot fatty oils. Rosin softens and melts under the influence of heat. Rosin burns with a bright but smoky flame. Rosin consists of a complex mixture of different substances including organic acids named the resin acids . Related to the terpenes, resin acid are oxidized terpenes. Resin acids dissolved in alkalis to form resin soaps , from which the purified resin acids are regenerated upon treatment with acids. Examples of resin acids are abietic acid sylvic acid, C 20 H 30 O 2 , plicatic acid contained in cedar, and pimaric acid , C 20 H 30 O 2 , a constituent of galipot resin. Abietic acid can also be extracted from rosin by means of hot alcohol. Pimaric acid closely resembles abietic acid into which it passes when distilled in a vacuum it has been supposed to consist of three isomers. Rosin is obtained from pines and some other plants , mostly conifers . 5  Plant resins are generally produced as stem secretions, but in some Central and South American species such as Euphorbia dalechampia and Clusia species they are produced as pollination rewards, and used by some stingless bee species to construct their nests. 6  7  Propolis , consisting largely of resins collected from plants such as poplars and conifers , is used by honey bees to seal small gaps in their hives, while larger gaps are filled with beeswax. 8  Petroleum- and insect-derived resins  edit  Shellac and lacquer are examples of insect-derived resins. Asphaltite and Utah resin are petroleum bitumens, not a product secreted by plants, although it was ultimately derived from plants. History and etymology  edit  Resin dripping from an almond tree Human use of plant resins has a very long history that was documented in ancient Greece by Theophrastus , in ancient Rome by Pliny the Elder , and especially in the resins known as frankincense and myrrh , prized in ancient Egypt . 9  These were highly prized substances, and required as incense in some religious rites. The word resin comes from French resine , from Latin resina resin, which either derives from or is a cognate of the Greek  rhtin resin of the pine, of unknown earlier origin, though probably non- Indo-European . 10  11  The word resin has been applied in the modern world to nearly any component of a liquid that will set into a hard lacquer or enamel -like finish. An example is nail polish. Certain casting resins and synthetic resins such as epoxy resin  have also been given the name resin. Some resins when soft are known as oleoresins, and when containing benzoic acid or cinnamic acid they are called balsams. Oleoresins are naturally occurring mixtures of an oil and a resin they can be extracted from various plants. Other resinous products in their natural condition are a mix with gum or mucilaginous substances and known as gum resins . Several natural resins are used as ingredients in perfumes, e.g., balsams of Peru and tolu, elemi, styrax, and certain turpentines. 5  Non-resinous exudates  edit  Other liquid compounds found inside plants or exuded by plants, such as sap , latex , or mucilage , are sometimes confused with resin but are not the same. Saps, in particular, serve a nutritive function that resins do not. Resin of a pine Uses  edit  Plant resins  edit  Plant resins are valued for the production of varnishes , adhesives , and food glazing agents . They are also prized as raw materials for the synthesis of other organic compounds and provide constituents of incense and perfume . The oldest known use of plant resin comes from the late Middle Stone Age in Southern Africa where it was used as an adhesive for hafting stone tools. 12  Lumps of dried frankincense resin Protium Sp. - MHNT The hard transparent resins, such as the copals, dammars , mastic , and sandarac , are principally used for varnishes and adhesives, while the softer odoriferous oleo-resins  frankincense , elemi , turpentine , copaiba , and gum resins containing essential oils  ammoniacum , asafoetida , gamboge , myrrh , and scammony  are more used for therapeutic purposes, food and incense . The resin of the Aleppo Pine is used to flavour retsina , a Greek resinated wine . 13  Synthetic resins  edit  Main article synthetic resin Many materials are produced via the conversion of synthetic resins to solids. Important examples are bisphenol A diglycidyl ether , which is a resin converted to epoxy glue upon the addition of a hardener. Silicones are often prepared from silicone resins via room temperature vulcanization . See also  edit  Amber Resin extraction  method of harvesting resin from trees Balsam of Peru  a balsam used in food and drink for flavoring, in perfumes and toiletries for fragrance, and in medicine and pharmaceutical items. Mastic plant resin  resin from the Pistacia lentiscus tree Pitch resin Kino gum  a plant gum similar to resin Biodegradable  plant resins are naturally biodegradable in many circumstances. Resin casting  casting with a resin, usually using a synthetic not a natural resin. Polyresin  a hard, synthetic resin for casting in molds References  edit   Chemistry, International Union of Pure and Applied. IUPAC Compendium of Chemical Terminology . iupac.org . IUPAC. doi  10.1351goldbook.RT07166 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em ce nter.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-outpu t .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Resins . www.fs.fed.us .  Plant Resins Chemistry, evolution, ecology, and ethnobotany, by Jean Langenheim, Timber Press , Portland, OR. 2003  David Grimaldi, Amber Window to the Past , 1996, p 16-20, American Museum of Natural History  a b Fiebach, Klemens Grimm, Dieter 2000. Resins, Natural. Ullmanns Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry . Weinheim Wiley-VCH. doi  10.100214356007.a23_073 . ISBN   978-3-527-30673-2 .  Bittrich, V. Amaral, Maria C. E. 1996. Flower morphology and pollination biology of some Clusia species from the Gran Sabana Venezuela. Kew Bulletin . 51 4 681694. doi  10.23074119722 . JSTOR   4119722 .  Gonalves-Alvim, Silmary de Jesus 2001. Resin-collecting bees Apidae on Clusia palmicida Clusiaceae in a riparian forest in Brazil. Journal of Tropical Ecology . 17 1 149153. doi  10.1017s0266467401001092 .  Simone-Finstrom, M. Spivak, M. 2010. Propolis and bee health The natural history and significance of resin use by honey bees PDF . Apidologie . 41 3 295311. doi  10.1051apido2010016 .  Queen Hatshepsuts expedition to the Land of Punt The first oceanographic cruise . Dept. of Oceanography, Texas A M University . Retrieved 2010-05-08 .  resin, n. and adj . OED Online . Oxford University Press. September 2014 . Retrieved 2 December 2014 .  resin n. . Online Etymology Dictionary . Retrieved 2 December 2014 .  Kozowyk, P. R. B. Langejans, G. H. J. Poulis, J. A. 2016-03-16. Lap Shear and Impact Testing of Ochre and Beeswax in Experimental Middle Stone Age Compound Adhesives . PLOS ONE . 11 3 e0150436. doi  10.1371journal.pone.0150436 . ISSN   1932-6203 .  Non-wood forest products from conifers - CHAPTER 6 . www.fao.org . External links  edit  The dictionary definition of resin at Wiktionary Media related to Resin at Wikimedia Commons v t e Non-timber forest products Animal products Furs Honey Pine honey Wild game Berries Tree fruit Blackberry Blueberry Bilberry Binukaw Breadfruit Cocoa bean Coconut Durian Gambooge Huckleberry Jackfruit Juniper berry Lingonberry Raspberry Tamarind Woodland strawberry Edible plants   roots Betel Fiddlehead ferns Mahuwa flowers Sago palm queen Sassafras fil powder root beer Saw palmetto Wild ginseng Mushrooms Bare-toothed russula Bay bolete Birch bolete Cep Chanterelle Honey mushroom Lingzhi Matsutake Meadow mushroom Morel Oyster mushroom Parasol mushroom Red cap Saffron milk cap Slippery jack Truffle Yellow knight Nuts Spices Allspice Areca nut Bay leaf Black pepper Brazil nut Cinnamon Clove Hazelnut Malva nut Nutmeg Pine nut Vanilla Oil Waxes Carnauba Chaulmoogra  Hydnocarpus wightiana  Cocoa butter Eucalyptol Eucalyptus Japan wax Kokum Kusum Mahuwa Nagkesar Palm   kernel  Pongamia Phulwara Pilu Sal-seed  Shorea robusta  Sandalwood Shea butter Tea-seed Tea-tree Vateria indica Resins Benzoin Birch tar Camphor Creosote Frankincense Gamboge Kauri Lacquer Mastic Myrrh Pine tar Pitch Rosin Turpentine Varnish Sap   Gum   etc. Birch syrup Chicle chewing gum Coconut sugar Date sugar Fruit syrup Gum arabic Gutta-percha Kino Latex Maple sugar Maple syrup Palm sugar Palm wine akpeteshie ogogoro Rubber Spruce gum Other Amadou Bamboo edible musical instruments textiles Birch bark Birch beer Cork Ferns Forage Gambier Moss Natural dyes henna Peat Quinine Rattan Shellac Tanbark tannin Thatching Tendu leaves Vegetable ivory Willow bark Related Dehesa Iberian agroforestry Forest farming   gardening Honey hunting Indian forest produce Mushroom hunting Naval stores Permaforestry Resin extraction Rubber tapping Wildcrafting Category Commons v t e Paper History Manufacture  Papermaking Types Amate Asphalt Baking Banana Bible Building Blotting Bond Cardboard Cartridge Coated paper Construction Copy Cotton rag Crpe Display D Graph Glassine Hemp India Korean Kraft Laid Lokta Manila Newsprint Oatmeal Onionskin Origami Paperboard Rice Rolling Scritta Security Seed Stone Tar Thermal Tissue Tracing Transfer Tree-free Wallpaper Washi Wasli Waterproof Wax Wood-free Wove Writing Xuan Materials China clay Fiber crop Paper chemicals Papyrus Wood pulp Specifications Grammage Density Paper sizes Units of paper quantity Surface chemistry of paper Wet strength Manufacture and process Bleaching of wood pulp Calender Conical refiner Deinking Paper pollution Environmental impact of paper Handmade paper Hollander beater Kraft process Organosolv Paper machine Paper recycling Papermaking Soda pulping Sulfite process Industry Paper industry In Europe In Canada In India In Japan In the United States Paper mill List of paper mills   CategoryPaper   Commons Authority control GND  4130013-0 NDL  00575139 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleResin oldid913999420  Categories  Resins Non-timber forest products Papermaking Tree tapping Hidden categories All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2015 Articles containing Ancient Greek-language text Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers