Fishing rod From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search This article needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources   Fishing rod     news    newspapers    books    scholar    JSTOR  February 2018   Learn how and when to remove this template message  Fishing with a fishing rod A fishing rod is a long, flexible rod used by fishermen to catch fish. At its simplest, a fishing rod is a simple stick or pole attached to a line ending in a hook formerly known as an angle , hence the term angling . The length of the rod can vary between 2 and 20 feet 0.61 and 6.10  m. To entice fish, bait or lures are impaled on one or more hooks attached to the line. The line is generally stored on a reel which reduces tangles and assists in landing a fish. Traditionally rods are made from bamboo , while contemporary rods are usually made from fibreglass or carbon fibre . In contrast with nets , which are usually used in subsistence and commercial fishing , fishing rods are more often used in recreational fishing and competitive casting . Fishing rods come in many sizes, actions, lengths and configurations depending on whether they are to be used for small, medium or large fish or in different fresh or salt water situations. Various types of fishing rods are designed for specific types of fishing. Fly rods are used to cast artificial flies , spinning rods and bait casting rods are designed to cast baits or lures. Ice fishing rods are designed to fish through small holes in ice covered lakes. Trolling rods are designed to drag bait or lures behind moving boats. Contents 1 History 1.1 Fly fishing 1.2 Technological improvements 2 Modern design 3 Rod making bench 4 Specifications 4.1 Power 4.2 Action 4.3 Bending curve and tapering 4.4 Line weight 4.5 Lure weight 4.6 Number of pieces 5 Types 5.1 Carbon fibre rods 5.2 Fly rods 5.3 Tenkara rods 5.4 IMModulus 5.5 Spin casting rods 5.6 Baitcasting rods 5.7 Spinning rods 5.8 Ultra-light rods 5.9 Ice rods 5.10 Sea rods 5.11 Surf rods 5.12 Trolling rods 5.13 Telescopic rods 6 See also 7 References History  edit  Judging by stone inscriptions dating back to 2000 BC, fishing rods go back to ancient Egypt , China, Greece , Trinidad and Tobago , Rome and medieval England. Fly fishing  edit  Trading card of the Ustonson company, an early firm specializing in fishing rods, and holder of a Royal Warrant from the 1760s The art of fly fishing took a great leap forward after the English Civil War , where a newly found interest in the activity left its mark on the many books and treatises that were written on the subject at the time. The renowned officer in the Parliamentary army , Robert Venables , published in 1662 The Experienced Angler, or Angling improved, being a general discourse of angling, imparting many of the aptest ways and choicest experiments for the taking of most sorts of fish in pond or river . 1  Compleat Angler was written by Izaak Walton in 1653 although Walton continued to add to it for a quarter of a century and described the fishing in the Derbyshire Wye . It was a celebration of the art and spirit of fishing in prose and verse six verses were quoted from John Dennys s earlier work. A second part to the book was added by Waltons friend Charles Cotton . 1  The 18th century was mainly an era of consolidation of the techniques developed in the previous century. Running rings began to appear along the fishing rods, which gave anglers greater control over the cast line. The rods themselves were also becoming increasingly sophisticated and specialized for different roles. Jointed rods became common from the middle of the century and bamboo came to be used for the top section of the rod, giving it a much greater strength and flexibility. The industry also became commercialized  rods and tackle were sold at the haberdashers store. After the Great Fire of London in 1666, artisans moved to Redditch which became a centre of production of fishing related products from the 1730s. Onesimus Ustonson established his trading shop in 1761, and his establishment remained as a market leader for the next century. He received a Royal Warrant from three successive monarchs starting with King George IV . 2  Technological improvements  edit  The impact of the Industrial Revolution was first felt in the manufacture of fly lines. Instead of anglers twisting their own lines, a laborious and time-consuming process, the new textile spinning machines allowed for a variety of tapered lines to be easily manufactured and marketed. Frontispiece from The Art of Angling by Richard Brookes , 1790 The material used for the rod itself changed from the heavy woods native to England, to lighter and more elastic varieties imported from abroad, especially from South America and the West Indies . Bamboo rods became the generally favoured option from the mid 19th century, and several strips of the material were cut from the cane, milled into shape, and then glued together to form light, strong, hexagonal rods with a solid core that were superior to anything that preceded them. 3  Other materials used, were Tonkin bamboo Calcutta reed , ash wood , hickory , ironwood , maple , lancewood , or malacca cane . These products were light, tough, and pliable. Rods were generally made in three pieces called a butt, midsection, and tip. The butts were frequently made of maple, with bored bottom this butt outlasted several tops. Midsections were generally made from ironwood because it was a thicker, strong wood. Tips were generally made from bamboo for its elasticity which could throw t he bait further and more accurately. Handles and grips were generally of cork, wood, or wrapped cane. Many different types of glue held these sections together, most commonly Irish glue and bone glue. This was until hilton glue, or cement glue, was introduced because of its waterproof qualities. 4  5  6  Even today, Tonkin split-bamboo rods are still popular in fly fishing. Until the mid-1800s rods were generally made in England . This changed in 1846 when American Samuel Phillippe introduced an imported fishing rod the first six strips of Calcutta cane made in Bavaria where Phillippe was importing Violins that he passed off as his own hand work. Split-cane rods were later independently produced after Phillippe started to sell the imported rods to a New York retailer and then copied by Americans Charle s Orvis, Hiram Leonard and Englishman William Hardy in the 1870s and mass production methods made these rods accessible to the public. 7  Horton Manufacturing Company first introduced an all steel rod in 1913. These rods were heavy and flexible and did not satisfy many customers. The next big occurrence in fishing rods was the introduction of the fiberglass rod in the 1940s and was developed by Robert Gayle and a Mr. Mcguire. 7  Boron and Graphite rods came around in the 1960s and 1970s when the United States and United Kingdom invested considerable research into developing the new technologies. Hewitt and Howald were the first to come up with a way to lay the fibers into the shape of a fishing rod by wrapping them around a piece of balsa wood. However, by 1977, boron fibre technology had been muscled out by the cheaper material graphite and was no longer competitive in the market. 7  Rods for travelers were made with nickel-silver metal joints, or ferrules, that could be inserted into one another forming the rod. Some of them were made to be used as a walking cane until needed for sport. Since the 1980s, with the advent of flexible, yet stiff graphite ferrules, travel rod technology has greatly advanced, and multi-piece travel rods that can be transported i n a suitcase or backpack constitute a large share of the market. Modern design  edit  In theory, an ideal rod should gradually taper from butt to tip, be tight in all its joints if any, and have a smooth, progressive taper, without dead spots. Modern design and fabrication techniques, along with advanced materials such as graphite , boron and fiberglass composites as well as stainless steelsee Emmrod- have allowed rod makers to tailor both the shape and action of fishing rods for greater casting distance, accuracy, and fish-fighting qualities. Today, fishing rods are identified by their weight meaning the weight of line or lure required to flex a fully loaded rod and action describing the speed with which the rod returns to its neutral position. Generally there are three types of rods used today graphite, fiberglass, and bamboo rods. Bamboo rods are the heaviest of the three, but people still use it for its feel. Fiberglass rods are the heaviest of the new chemically-made material rods. They are mostly popular with the new and young anglers, as well as anglers who cannot afford the generally more expensive graphite rod s. They are more commonly found among those anglers that fish in rugged areas such as on rocks or piers where knocking the rod on hard objects is a greater possibility. This may potentially cause breakage, making a fiberglass rod preferable for some anglers due to its higher durability and affordability compared to graphite rods. Todays most popular rod tends to be graphite fo r its light weight characteristics and its ability to allow for further and more accurate cast. 7  8  Graphite rods tend to be more sensitive, allowing the user to feel bites from fish easier. Modern fishing rods retain cork as a common material for grips. Cork is light, durable, keeps warm and tends to transmit rod vibrations better than synthetic materials, although EVA foam is also used. Reel seats are often of graphite-reinforced plastic, aluminium, or wood. Guides are available in steel and titanium with a wide variety of high-tech metal alloy inserts replacing the classic agate inserts of earlier rods. Back- or butt-rests can also be used with modern fishing rods to make it easier to pull big fish off the water. These are fork-like supports that help keep the rod in position, providing leverage and counteracting tensions caused by a caught fish. Rod making bench  edit  An old rod-making bench would generally consist of a 6 to 8-foot bench, vice, a drawing knife, a jack, a fore plane, large coarse flat file, sand paper, and several strips of wood about 2 feet long with different size grooves in them. 4  Newer rod building benches are smaller versions of lathes powered by small motors that turn the rod as thread is applied to secure the guides. The motor is controlled by a rheostat think sewing machine foot pedal. A low rpm motor can be used to apply rod finish, typically a two-part resin, to protect the threads. Specifications  edit  There are several specifications manufacturers use to delineate rod uses. These include power, action, line weight, lure weight, and number of pieces. Power  edit  Also known as power value or rod weight. Rods may be classified as ultra-light, light, medium-light, medium, medium-heavy, heavy, ultra-heavy, or other similar combinations. Power is often an indicator of what types of fishing, species of fish, or size of fish a particular pole may be best used for. Ultra-light rods are suitable for catching small bait fish and also panfish , or situations where rod responsiveness is critical. Ultra-Heavy rods are used in deep sea fishing, surf fishing, or for heavy fish by weight. While manufacturers use various designations for a rods power, there is no fixed standard, hence application of a particular power tag by a manufacturer is somewhat subjective. Any fish can theoretically be caught with any rod, of cour se, but catching panfish on a heavy rod offers no sport whatsoever, and successfully landing a large fish on an ultralight rod requires supreme rod handling skills at best, and more frequently ends in broken tackle and a lost fish. Rods are best suited to the type of fishing they are intended for. Action  edit  Action refers to the speed with which the rod returns to its neutral position. An action may be slow, medium, fast, or anything in between e.g. medium-fast. Contrary to how it is often presented, action does not refer to the bending curve. A rod with fast action can as easily have a progressive bending curve from tip to butt as a top only bending curve. The action can be influenced by the tapering of a rod, the length and the materials used for the blank. 9  Typically a rod which uses a glass fibre composite blank is slower than a rod which uses a carbon fibre composite blank. Action, however, is also often a subjective description of a manufacturer. Very often action is misused to note the bending curve instead of the speed. Some manufacturers list the power value of the rod as its action. A medium action bamboo rod may have a faster action than a fast fibreglass rod. Action is also subjectively used by anglers, as an angler might compare a give n rod as faster or slower than a different rod. A rods action and power may change when load is greater or lesser than the rods specified casting weight. When the load used greatly exceeds a rods specifications a rod may break during casting, if the line doesnt break first. When the load is significantly less than the rods recommended range the casting distance is significantly reduced, as the rods action cannot launch the load. It acts like a stiff pole. In fly rods, exceeding weight ratings may warp the blank or have casting difficulties when rods are improperly loaded. Rods with a fast action combined with a full progressive bending curve allows the fisherman to make longer casts, given that the cast weight and line diameter is correct. When a cast weight exceeds the specifications lightly, a rod becomes slower, slightly reducing the distance. When a cast weight is slightly less than the specified casting weight the distance is slightly reduc ed as well, as the rod action is only used partially. Bending curve and tapering  edit  A fishing rods main function is to bend and deliver a certain resistance or power While casting, the rod acts as a catapult by moving the rod forward, the inertia of the mass of the bait or lure and rod itself, will load bend the rod and launch the lure or bait. When a bite is registered and the fisherman strikes, the bending of the rod will dampen the strike to avoid line failure. When fighting a fish, the bending of the rod not only enables the fisherman to keep the line under tension, but the bending of the rod will also keep the fish under a constant pressure which will exhaust the fish and enable the fisherman to actually catch the fish. Also the bending lessens the effect of the leverage by shortening the distance of the lever the rod. A stiff rod will demand lots of power of the fisherman, while actually less power is put on the fish. In comparison, a deep bending rod will demand less power from the fisherman, but deliver more fighting power to the fish. In practice, this leverage effect often misleads fisherman. Often it is believed that a hard, stiff rod puts more control and power on the fish to fight, whi le it is actually the fish who is putting the power on the fisherman. In commercial fishing practice, big and strong fish are often just pulled in on the line itself without much effort, which is possible because the absence of the leverage effect. A rod can bend in different curves. Traditionally the bending curve is mainly determined by its tapering. In simplified terms, a fast taper will bend a lot more in the tip area and not much in the butt part, and a slow taper will tend to bend too much at the butt and delivers a weak rod. A progressive tapering which loads smooth from top to butt, adding in power the deeper the rod is bent. In practice, the tapers of quality rods often are curved or in steps to achieve the right action and bending curve for the type of fishing a rod is built. In todays practice, different fibres with different properties can be used in a single rod. In this practice, there is no straight relationship anymore between the actual tapering and the bending curve. The bending curve isnt easily described by terms. However, some rod  blank manufacturers try to simplify things towards their customers by describing the bending curve by associating them with their action. The term fast action is used for rods where only the tip is bending, and slow action for rods bending from tip to butt. In practice, this is misleading, as top-quality rods are very often fast-action rods, bending from tip to butt. While the so-called fast-action rods are stiff rods with absence of any action which end in a soft or slow tip section. The construction of a progressive bending, fast action rod is more difficult and more expensive to achieve. Common terms to describe the bending curve or properties which influence the bending curve are progressive taperloadingcurvebending..., fast taper, heavy progressive notes a bending curve close to progressive, tending to become fast-tapered, tip action also referred to as umbrella-action, broom-action which refers to the previously mentioned stiff fast action-rods with soft tip. A parabolic action is often used to note a progressive bending curve, in fact this term comes from a series of splitcane fly rods built by Pezon  Michel in France since the late 1930s, which had a progressive bending curve. Sometimes the term parabolic is more specific used to note the specific type of progressive bending curve as was found in the Parabolic series. A common way today to describe a rods bending properties is the Common Cents System, which is a system of objective and relative measurement for quantifying rod power, action and even this elusive thing ... fishermen like to call feel. 10  The bending curve determines the way a rod builds up and releases its power. This influences not only the casting and the fish-fighting properties, but also the sensitivity to strikes when fishing lures, the ability to set a hook which is also related to the mass of the rod, the control over the lure or bait, the way the rod should be handled and how the power is distributed over the rod. On a full progressive rod, the power is distributed most evenly over the whole rod. Line weight  edit  A rod is usually also classified by the optimal weight of fishing line or in the case of fly rods, fly line the rod should handle. Fishing line weight is described in pounds of tensile force before the line parts. Line weight for a rod is expressed as a range that the rod is designed to support. Fly rod weights are typically expressed as a number from 1 to 12, written as Nwt e.g. 6wt. and each weight represents a standard weight in grains for the first 30 feet of the fly line established by the American Fishing Tackle Manufacturing Association. For example, the first 30 of a 6wt fly line should weigh between 152-168 grains, with the optimal weight being 160 grains. In casting and spinning rods, designations such as 8-15 lb. line are typical. Lure weight  edit  A rod may also be described by the weight of lure or hook that the rod is designed to support. Lure weight is usually expressed in ounces or grams. Number of pieces  edit  Rods that are one piece from butt to tip are considered to have the most natural feel, and are preferred by many, though the difficulty in transporting them safely becomes an increasing problem with increasing rod length. Two-piece rods, joined by a ferrule, are very common, and if well engineered especially with tubular glass or carbon fibre rods, sacrifice very little in the way of natural feel. Some fishermen do feel a difference in sensitivity with two-piece rods, but most do not. Some rods are joined through a metal bus. These add mass to the rod which helps in setting the hook and help activating the rod from tip to butt when casting, resulting in a better casting experience. Some anglers experience this kind of fitting as superior to a one piece rod. They are found on specialised hand-built rods. Apart from adding the correct mass, depending on the ki nd of rod, this fitting also is the strongest known fitting, but also the most expensive one. For that reason they are almost never to be found on commercial fishing rods. Types  edit  A fibreglass spinning rod and reel circa 1997 Fishing rods can be constructed out of a vast number of materials. Generally they are made with either fiberglass, graphite, or a new generation composite, also known as carbon fibre. Many times carbon fibre and graphite are used together in the rod making process. 9  Carbon fibre rods  edit  This section does not cite any sources . Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .  May 2015   Learn how and when to remove this template message  A carbon fibre rod is not necessarily better than a glass fibre rod the two fibres have different properties, with their own tradeoffs. Carbon fibre is less flexible stiffer than glass fibre and more brittle and prone to breakage when misused, 11  while carbon fibre allows for longer and faster rods. Carbon fibre also allows for a smaller diameter rod that is more sensitive than a glass fibre rod. 9  A carbon fibre rod is also much lighter than a glass fibre rod allowing for longer days of fishing. 12  Each has its purpose in the fishing industry and both improve an anglers chances of being successful when the blanks are used for the right purposes. Fly rods  edit  Main article Fly fishing Fly rods, thin, flexible fishing rods designed to cast an artificial fly , usually consisting of a hook tied with fur, feathers, foam, or other lightweight material. More modern flies are also tied with synthetic materials. Originally made of yew, green heart, and later split bamboo Tonkin cane, most modern fly rods are constructed from man-made composite materials, including fibreglass, carbon graphite , or graphite boron composites. Split bamboo rods are generally considered the most beautiful, the most classic, and are also generally the most fragile of the styles, and they require a great deal of care to last well. Instead of a weighted lure, a fly rod uses the weight of the fly line for casting, and lightweight rods are capable of casting the very smallest and lightest fly. Typically, a m onofilament segment called a leader is tied to the fly line on one end and the fly on the other. Each rod is sized to the fish being sought, the wind and water conditions and also to a particular weight of line larger and heavier line sizes will cast heavier, larger flies. Fly rods come in a wide variety of line sizes, from size 000 to 0 rods for the smallest freshwater trout and pan fish up to and including 16 rods 13  for large saltwater game fish. Fly rods tend to have a single, large-diameter line guide called a stripping guide, with a number of smaller looped guides aka snake guides spaced along the rod to help control the movement of the relatively thick fly line . To prevent interference with casting movements, most fly rods usually have little or no butt section  handle  extending below the fishing reel . However, the Spey rod , a fly rod with an elongated rear handle, is often used for fishing either large rivers for salmon and Steelhead or saltwater surf casting , using a two-handed casting technique. Fly rods are, in modern manufacture, almost always built out of carbon graphite. The graphite fibres are laid down in increasingly sophisticated patterns to keep the rod from flattening when stressed usually referred to as hoop strength. The rod tapers from one end to the other and the degree of taper determines how much of the rod flexes when stressed. The larger amount of t he rod that flexes the slower the rod. Slower rods are easier to cast, create lighter presentations but create a wider loop on the forward cast that reduces casting distance and is subject to the effects of wind. 14  Furthermore, the process of wrapping graphite fibre sheets to build a rod creates imperfections that result in rod twist during casting. Rod twist is minimized by orienting the rod guides along the side of the rod with the most give. This is done by flexing the rod and feeling for the point of most give or by using computerized rod testing. 15  See also Fly fishing . Custom rod building is an active hobby among fly fishermen. See Fly rod building . Tenkara rods  edit  Tenkara rods are a type of fly rod used for tenkara fishing in Japan. A mixture of the rods in the other categories, they are carbon rods, fly rods and telescopic rods all in one. These are ultra-light and very portable telescopic rods read more about telescopic below. Their extended length normally ranges from 11 to 13 feet, and they have a very soft action. The action of tenkara rods has been standardized as a ratio of how many pa rts are stiffer   how many tip parts bend more easily. The standard actions are 55, 64, 73, and 82, with 55 being a softerslower rod, and 82 being a stiffer rod. 16  Similar to western fly-rods tenkara rods also have cork, and sometimes even wooden handles, with wooden handles such as red-pine, and phoenix-tree wood being the more prized rods due to their increased sensitivity to fish bites and the heavier feel that helps balance the rods. Tenkara rods have no guides. Tenkara is a fixed-line fishing method, where no reel is used, but rat her the line is tied directly to the tip of the rod. Like the carbon rods mentioned above this allows for very precise positioning of the fly of which the which in turn enables huge catches of fish with accurate feeding. One of the most common flies used in tenkara fishing is the Sakasa Kebari . Tenkara fishing is very popular in Japan, where these rods can be found in every major tackle shop. In the US, tenkara is beginning to grow in popularity. IMModulus  edit  This section contains instructions, advice, or how-to content . The purpose of Wikipedia is to present facts, not to train. Please help improve this article either by rewriting the how-to content or by moving it to Wikiversity , Wikibooks or Wikivoyage .  January 2010  IM6, IM7, etc. are trade names for particular graphite produced by the Hexcel Corporation. These numbers are not industry standards nor an indication of quality, especially since other companies use the designations to refer to graphite not made by Hexcel. At best, they allow you to compare the quality of the material used to build different rods by the same manufacturer an IM 7 rod would use better graphite than an IM6 rod if both are made by the same manufacturer. It is more difficult to say the same about rods from two different companies, since they could be made from material from completely different manufacturers. Modulus refers to the stiffness of the graphite, not the amount of material used or the number of graphite fibres incorporated into the sheets. Buying a rod based solely on the modulus rating is a mistake because other factors must be considered, for example, if the fisherman does not want the stiffest rod for light line techniques or cranking. In addition, other qualities must be incorporated in the graphite itself and the rod must be designed correctly to ensure the best performance and durability of the rod. The other components that go into a quality rod can also add significantly to the cost. As of both IM and modulus, the higher rating, the stiffer the carbon fibres in the rod, together with this stiffness, the carbon also becomes more brittle and show more wear over time. Spin casting rods  edit  Spin casting rods are rods designed to hold a spin casting reel , which are normally mounted above the handle. Spin casting rods also have small eyes and, frequently, a forefinger grip trigger. They are very similar to bait casting rods, to the point where either type of reel may be used on a particular rod. While rods were at one time offered as specific spin casting or bait casting rods, this has become uncommon, as the rod design is suited to either fishing style, and today they are generally called simply casting rods, and are usually offered with no distinction as to which style they are best suited for in use. Baitcasting rods  edit  While the easy to use spin casting rods are often used by novice anglers, baitcasting rods and reels are generally more difficult to use. Professional anglers, however, prefer baitcasting rod and reel combos because baitcasting reels grant anglers more accuracy in their casts. Casting rods are typically viewed as somewhat more powerful than their spinning rod counterparts  the y can use heavier line and can handle heavier cover. Baitcasting rods low profile design along with a super silent high-speed 7.01-line retrieve. Spinning rods  edit  26.4  in. 67  cm long pike caught on an ultra-light spinning rod 5 grams casting weight using a 1 in. 25mm spinner bait Spinning rods are made from graphite or fiberglass with a cork or PVC foam handle, and tend to be between 5 and 8.5 feet 1.52.6 m in length. Typically, spinning rods have anywhere from 5-8 guides arranged along the underside of the rod to help control the line. The eyes decrease in size from the handle to the tip, with the one nearest the handle usually much larger than the rest to allow less friction as the coiled line comes off the reel, and to gather the very large loops of line that come off the spinning reels spool. Unlike bait casting and spin casting reels, the spinning reel hangs beneath the rod rather than sitting on top, and is held in place with a sliding or locking reel seat. The fishermans second and third fingers straddle the leg of the reel where it is attached to the reel seat on the rod, and the weight of the reel hangs beneath the rod, which makes for a more comfortable way to fish for extended periods. This also allows the rod to be held in the fishermans dominant hand the handle on most modern spinning reels is reversible which greatly increases control and nuance applied to the rod itself. Sp inning rods and reels are widely used in fishing for popular North American sport fish including bass, trout , pike and walleye . Popular targets for spinning in the UK and European continent are pike, perch, eel and zander walleye. Longer spinning rods with elongated grip handles for two-handed casting are frequently employed for saltwater or steelhead and salmon fishing. Spinning rods are also widely used for trolling and still fishing with live bait. Ultra-light rods  edit  These rods are used to fish for smaller species, they provide more sport with larger fish, or to enable fishing with lighter line and smaller lures. Though the term is commonly used to refer to spinning or spin-cast rods and tackle, fly rods in smaller line weights size 03 have also long been utilized for ultra-light fishing, as well as to protect the thin-diameter, lightw eight end section of leader, or tippet , used in this type of angling. Ultra-light spinning and casting rods are generally shorter 4 to 5.5 feet 1.2 to 1.7  m is common lighter, and more limber than normal rods. Tip actions vary from slow to fast, depending upon intended use. These rods usually carry 1 to 6 pound 4.5 to 27  N test fishing line . Some ultra-light rods are capable of casting lures as light as 164th of an ounce 0.4  g  typically small spinners, wet flies, crappie jigs , tubes, or bait such as trout worms . Originally produced to bring more excitement to the sport, ultra-light spin fishing is now widely used for crappie , trout , bass , bluegill ,Roach, Perch, Bream,Pumpkin-seed, Tench and other types of pan fish . Ice rods  edit  Modern ice rods are typically very short spinning rods, varying between 24 and 36 inches 61 and 91  cm in length. Classic ice rods  still widely used  are simply stiff rod-like pieces of wood, usually with a carved wooden handle, a couple of line guides, and two opposing hooks mounted ahead of the handle to hand-wind the line around. Ice rods are used to fish through holes in the cover ice of frozen lakes and ponds. Sea rods  edit  Sea rods are designed for use with fish from the ocean. They are long, around 4 metres on average, extremely thick, and feature huge and heavy tips, eyes, and handles. The largest of sea rods are for use with sport fishing boats. Some of these are specialized rods, including shark rods, and marlin rods, and are for use with very heavy equipment. Surf rods  edit  The most common type of sea rods are for surf casting . Surf casting rods resemble oversized spinning or bait casting rods with long grip handles intended for two-handed casting techniques. Generally between 10 and 14 feet 34  m in length, surf casting rods need to be longer in order for the user cast the lure or bait beyond the breaking surf where fish tend to congregate, and sturdy enough to cast heavy weighted lures or bait needed to hold the bottom in rough water. They are almost always used in shore fishing sea fishing from the shoreline from the beach, rocks or other shore feature. Some sur fcasters use powerful rods to cast up to six ounces or more of lead weight, artificial lures, andor bait over one hundred yards. Trolling rods  edit  Trolling is a fishing method of casting the lure or bait to the side of, or behind, a moving boat, and letting the motion of the boat pull the bait through the water. In theory, for light and medium freshwater gamefishing, any casting or spinning rod with the possible exception of ultralight rods can be used for trolling. In the last 30 years, most manufacturers have develope d a complete line of generally long, heavily built rods sold as Trolling Rods, and aimed generally at ocean anglers and Great Lakes salmon and steelhead fishermen. A rod effective for trolling should have relatively fast action, as a very whippy slow action rod is extremely frustrating to troll with, and a fast action fairly stiff rod is generally much easier to work with when fishing by this method. Perhaps the extreme in this philosophy was reached during the 1940s and early 1950s, when the now-defun ct True Temper corporation  a maker of garden tools  marketed a line of trolling rods of 4.5 to 5  ft length made of tempered steel which were square in cross section. They acted as excellent trolling rods, though the action was much too stiff for sportsmanlike playing of fish once hooked. As Great Lakes sportfishing in particular becomes more popular with each passing year, all rod manufacturers continue to expand their lines of dedicated trolling rods, though as noted, for most inland lake and stream fishing, a good casting or spinning rod is perfectly adequate for trolling. Telescopic rods  edit  Telescopic rod. Lake Baikal. Eastern Siberia Telescopic fishing rods are designed to collapse down to a short length and open to a long rod. 20 or even 30  ft rods can close to as little as a foot and a half. This makes the rods very easy to transport to remote areas or travel on buses, compact cars, or public buses and subways. Telescopic fishing rods are made from the same materials as conventional multi-piece rods. Graphite, carbon, and sometimes fibreglass, or composites of these materials, are designed to slip into each othe r so that they open and close. The eyes on the spinning rods are generally, but not always, a special design to aid in making the end of each section stronger. Various grade eyes available in conventional rods are also available in telescopic fishing rods. The eyeless Tenkara style rods are also of this type and are typically made from carbon andor graphite. Care for telescopic fishing rods is much the same as other rods. The only difference being that one should not open the telescopic rod in manner that whips a closed rod into the open position rapidly. Whipping or flinging a telescopic fishing rod open may and likely will cause it to be difficult to close. When closing the rods make a slight twisting motion while pushing the sec tions together. Often the rods come with tip covers to protect the tip and guides. Additionally, extra care must be taken not to get dirt or sand in the joints due to their design this can easily damage this style of rod. Telescopic rods are popular among surf fishermen . Carrying around a 12 or 14  ft surf fishing rod, even in two pieces, is cumbersome. The shorter the sections the shorter they close, the more eyes they have, and the better the power curve is in them. More eyes means better weight and stress distribution throughout the parabolic arc. This translates to further casting, stronger fish fighting abilities, and less breaking of the rod. See also  edit  Wikimedia Commons has media related to Fishing rods . Composite materials Fishing reel References  edit   a b Andrew N. Herd. Fly fishing techniques in the fifteenth century . Archived from the original on 21 June 2014. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Welcome To Great Fly Fishing Tips . Archived from the original on 27 June 2017. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   fishing . Encyclopdia Britannica . Archived from the original on 4 May 2015. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   a b Norris, Thaddeus 1864. The American Angler . Philadelphia E. H. Butler.  Stewart, William 1905. The Practical Angler . London A. and C. Black.  Clemens, Dale 1978. Advanced Custom Rod Building . London Winchester Press.  a b c d Phillips, Don 2000. The Technology of Fly Rods . Portland, Oregon Frank Amato Publications.  Selecting a Fly Rod . Hooked on Flies. Archived from the original on 26 November 2011. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   a b c Povermo, George March 2016. Rod Savvy. Salt Water Sportsman . 77 3 3134.  Hanneman, William. The Common Cents System . common-cents.info . RodMaker Magazine. Archived from the original on 9 February 2018 . Retrieved 9 February 2018 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   How To Begin Fly Fishing The Perfect Guide FREE . Outdoor Survivors . Archived from the original on 10 March 2016 . Retrieved 9 March 2016 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Wessman, Bo 2004. Complete guide to fishing   building your own rod . Broomall, PA Published in the United States by Mason Crest Publishers. p.  8. ISBN   9781590845509 .  Johnson, Paul, Sage Manufacturing News Release of 16-weight 1680-4 Xi2 Saltwater Fly Rod , 24 August 2005  Fly Rods   Guide to Fly Rod Flex  Action Archived 30 January 2018 at the Wayback Machine  Fly Rod Balancing Archived 19 September 2008 at the Wayback Machine  Tenkara USA, About Tenkara Archived 21 April 2009 at the Wayback Machine Poveromo, George. Rod Savvy. Salt Water Sportsman 77.3 2016 31-34. SPORTDiscus with Full Text. Web. 16 February 2016. Fishing tackle Fish hook Circle hook Gaff Hookset Sniggle Fishing line Braided Knots Monofilament Multifilament Power pro Swivel Fishing sinker Arlesey Bomb Bombarda Downrigger Sandsinker Fishing rod Bamboo fly rod Fishing reel Fishing rod tapers Fly rod building Fishing bait Bait fish Boilies Chum Clonk Groundbait Vermicompost Worm charming Plastic bait Deadsticking Plastic worm Fishing lures Artificial fly Heddon Little Cleo Mormyshka Original Floater Plug Sabiki Spinnerbait Spoon lure Spoonplug Surface lure Swimbait Topwater lure Zara Spook Bite indicators Fishing float Pellet waggler Shortfloating Quiver tip Fishing rig Carolina rig Chod rig Hair rig Texas rig Apparel Creel Diving mask Hip boot Personal flotation device Snorkel Waders Wetsuit Other Fish stringer Tackle box Fishing techniques Gathering Abalone Ama divers Clam digging Flounder tramping Gathering seafood by hand Noodling Pearl hunting Scallop aquaculture Trout binning Trout tickling Spears Bowfishing Gigging Harpoon Hawaiian sling Polespear Spearfishing Speargun Trident Fishing lines Dropline Drum lines Handline fishing Jiggerpole Jigging Jug fishing Longline fishing Spin fishing Trolling Trotline Fishing nets Cast net Chinese fishing net Drift net Ghost nets Gill net Glass floats Hand net Ice jigger Lampara net Lampuki net Lave net Lift net Seine net Surrounding net Tangle net Trawl net Turtle excluder device Fish traps Almadraba Corf Crab trap Double-Heart of Stacked Stones Eel buck Fish wheel Fishing basket Fishing weir Lobster trap Putcher fishing Trabucco Other Basnig Blast fishing Cormorant fishing Cyanide fishing Dredging Electrofishing Electric pulse fishing Fish aggregating device Fish toxins Fishfinder Fishing light attractor Flossing Ice fishing Kite fishing Muroami Otter fishing Payaos Shrimp baiting Snagging v t e Fisheries and fishing topic areas Fisheries Aquaculture Diversity of fish Fish diseases and parasites Fish farming Fisheries management Fisheries science Individual fishing quota Sustainable fishery Overfishing Wild fisheries Fishing Artisanal fishing Fisherman Fishing vessel History of fishing Industry List of harvested aquatic animals by weight By country Commercial fishing Marketing Markets Processing Products Seafood Recreation Angling Big-game fishing Catch and release Fishing tournaments Fly fishing Techniques Fish trap Fishfinder Fishing net Gathering seafood by hand Handline fishing Spearfishing Trawling Trolling Tackle Artificial flies Bait Bite indicators Hook Line Lures Rod Sinker Locations Fish ponds Fishing banks Fishing villages Marine habitats Glossary Index Outline Category Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleFishing_rod oldid912045315  Categories  Fishing equipment Hidden categories CS1 errors deprecated parameters Webarchive template wayback links Use dmy dates from July 2013 Articles needing additional references from February 2018 All articles needing additional references Articles needing additional references from May 2015 Articles needing cleanup from January 2010 All pages needing cleanup Articles containing how-to sections Commons category link is on Wikidata