Aerospace engineering From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Aerospace Engineer NASA engineers, seen here in mission control during Apollo 13 , worked diligently to protect the lives of the astronauts on the mission. Occupation Names Aerospace engineer Engineer Occupation type Profession Activity sectors Aeronautics , astronautics , science Description Competencies Technical knowledge, management skills see also glossary of aerospace engineering  Education required Bachelors Degree 1  2  Fields of employment Technology , science , space exploration , military Part of a series on Astrodynamics Orbital mechanics Orbital parameters Apsis Argument of periapsis Azimuth Eccentricity Inclination Mean anomaly Orbital nodes Semi-major axis True anomaly Types of two-body orbits , by eccentricity Circular orbit Elliptic orbit Transfer orbit  Hohmann transfer orbit Bi-elliptic transfer orbit  Parabolic orbit Hyperbolic orbit Radial orbit Decaying orbit Equations Dynamical friction Escape velocity Keplers equation Keplers laws of planetary motion Orbital period Orbital velocity Surface gravity Specific orbital energy Vis-viva equation Celestial mechanics Gravitational influences Barycenter Hill sphere Perturbations Sphere of influence N-body orbits Lagrangian points  Halo orbits  Lissajous orbits Lyapunov orbits Engineering and efficiency Preflight engineering Mass ratio Payload fraction Propellant mass fraction Tsiolkovsky rocket equation Efficiency measures Gravity assist Oberth effect v t e Aerospace engineering is the primary field of engineering concerned with the development of aircraft and spacecraft . 3  It has two major and overlapping branches aeronautical engineering and astronautical engineering. Avionics engineering is similar, but deals with the electronics side of aerospace engineering. Aeronautical engineering was the original term for the field. As flight technology advanced to include craft operating in outer space  astronautics , the broader term  aerospace engineering has come into common use. 4  Aerospace engineering, particularly the astronautics branch, is often colloquially referred to as rocket science. 5  Contents 1 Overview 2 History 3 Elements 4 Degree programs 5 In popular culture 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Overview  edit  Flight vehicles are subjected to demanding conditions such as those caused by changes in atmospheric pressure and temperature , with structural loads applied upon vehicle components. Consequently, they are usually the products of various technological and engineering disciplines including aerodynamics , propulsion , avionics , materials science , structural analysis and manufacturing . The interaction between these technologies is known as aerospace engineering. Because of the complexity and number of disciplines involved, aerospace engineering is carried out by teams of engineers, each having their own specialized area of expertise. 6  History  edit  See also History of aviation Orville and Wilbur Wright flew the Wright Flyer in 1903 at Kitty Hawk, North Carolina. The origin of aerospace engineering can be traced back to the aviation pioneers around the late 19th to early 20th centuries, although the work of Sir George Cayley dates from the last decade of the 18th to mid-19th century. One of the most important people in the history of aeronautics , 7  Cayley was a pioneer in aeronautical engineering 8  and is credited as the first person to separate the forces of lift and drag , which are in effect on any flight vehicle. 9  Early knowledge of aeronautical engineering was largely empirical with some concepts and skills imported from other branches of engineering. 10  Scientists understood some key elements of aerospace engineering, like fluid dynamics , in the 18th century. Many years later after the successful flights by the Wright brothers , the 1910s saw the development of aeronautical engineering through the design of World War I military aircraft. Between World Wars I and II, great leaps were made in Aeronautical Engineering. The advent of mainstream civil aviation greatly accelerated this process. Notable airplanes of this era include the Curtiss JN 4 , the Farman F.60 Goliath , and Fokker trimotor . Notable military airplanes of this period include the Mitsubishi A6M Zero , the Supermarine Spitfire and the Messerschmitt Bf 109 from Japan, Great Britain, and Germany respectively. A significant development in Aerospace engineering came with the first operational Jet engine -powered airplane, the Messerschmitt Me 262 which entered service in 1944 towards the end of the second World War. The first definition of aerospace engineering appeared in February 1958. 4  The definition considered the Earths atmosphere and the outer space as a single realm, thereby encompassing both aircraft  aero  and spacecraft  space  under a newly coined word aerospace . In response to the USSR launching the first satellite, Sputnik into space on October 4, 1957, U.S. aerospace engineers launched the first American satellite on January 31, 1958. The National Aeronautics and Space Administration was founded in 1958 as a response to the Cold War. In 1969, Apollo 11 , the first manned space mission to the moon took place. It saw three astronauts enter orbit around the Moon, with two, Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin , visiting the lunar surface. The third astronaut, Michael Collins , stayed in orbit to rendezvous with Armstrong and Aldrin after their visit to the lunar surface. 11  This section needs expansion with newer history, including recent events. You can help by adding to it .  November 2009  Elements  edit  Wernher von Braun , with the F-1 engines of the Saturn V first stage at the US Space and Rocket Center Soyuz TMA-14M spacecraft engineered for descent by parachute See also List of aerospace engineering topics Some of the elements of aerospace engineering are 12  13  A fighter jet engine undergoing testing. The tunnel behind the engine allows noise and exhaust to escape. Radar cross-section   the study of vehicle signature apparent to Radar remote sensing . Fluid mechanics   the study of fluid flow around objects. Specifically aerodynamics concerning the flow of air over bodies such as wings or through objects such as wind tunnels see also lift and aeronautics . Astrodynamics   the study of orbital mechanics including prediction of orbital elements when given a select few variables. While few schools in the United States teach this at the undergraduate level, several have graduate programs covering this topic usually in conjunction with the Physics department of said college or university. Statics and Dynamics engineering mechanics   the study of movement, forces, moments in mechanical systems. Mathematics   in particular, calculus , differential equations , and linear algebra . Electrotechnology   the study of electronics within engineering. Propulsion   the energy to move a vehicle through the air or in outer space is provided by internal combustion engines , jet engines and turbomachinery , or rockets see also propeller and spacecraft propulsion . A more recent addition to this module is electric propulsion and ion propulsion . Control engineering   the study of mathematical modeling of the dynamic behavior of systems and designing them, usually using feedback signals, so that their dynamic behavior is desirable stable, without large excursions, with minimum error. This applies to the dynamic behavior of aircraft, spacecraft, propulsion systems, and subsystems that exist on aerospace vehicles. Aircraft structures   design of the physical configuration of the craft to withstand the forces encountered during flight. Aerospace engineering aims to keep structures lightweight and low-cost while maintaining structural integrity. 14  Materials science   related to structures, aerospace engineering also studies the materials of which the aerospace structures are to be built. New materials with very specific properties are invented, or existing ones are modified to improve their performance. Solid mechanics   Closely related to material science is solid mechanics which deals with stress and strain analysis of the components of the vehicle. Nowadays there are several Finite Element programs such as MSC PatranNastran which aid engineers in the analytical process. Aeroelasticity   the interaction of aerodynamic forces and structural flexibility, potentially causing flutter , divergence, etc. Avionics   the design and programming of computer systems on board an aircraft or spacecraft and the simulation of systems. Software   the specification, design, development, test, and implementation of computer software for aerospace applications, including flight software , ground control software , test  evaluation software, etc. Risk and reliability   the study of risk and reliability assessment techniques and the mathematics involved in the quantitative methods. Noise control   the study of the mechanics of sound transfer. Aeroacoustics   the study of noise generation via either turbulent fluid motion or aerodynamic forces interacting with surfaces. Flight test   designing and executing flight test programs in order to gather and analyze performance and handling qualities data in order to determine if an aircraft meets its design and performance goals and certification requirements. The basis of most of these elements lies in theoretical physics , such as fluid dynamics for aerodynamics or the equations of motion for flight dynamics . There is also a large empirical component. Historically, this empirical component was derived from testing of scale models and prototypes, either in wind tunnels or in the free atmosphere. More recently, advances in computing have enabled the use of computational fluid dynamics to simulate the behavior of the fluid, reducing time and expense spent on wind-tunnel testing. Those studying hydrodynamics or Hydroacoustics often obtained degrees in Aerospace Engineering. Additionally, aerospace engineering addresses the integration of all components that constitute an aerospace vehicle subsystems including power, aerospace bearings , communications, thermal control , life support , etc. and its life cycle design, temperature, pressure, radiation , velocity , lifetime . Degree programs  edit  Main article List of aerospace engineering schools Aerospace engineering may be studied at the advanced diploma , bachelors , masters , and Ph.D. levels in aerospace engineering departments at many universities, and in mechanical engineering departments at others. A few departments offer degrees in space-focused astronautical engineering. Some institutions differentiate between aeronautical and astronautical engineering. Graduate degrees are offered in advanced or specialty areas for the aerospace industry. A background in chemistry, physics, computer science and mathematics is important for students pursuing an aerospace engineering degree. 15  In popular culture  edit  The term  rocket scientist  is sometimes used to describe a person of great intelligence since rocket science is seen as a practice requiring great mental ability, especially technically and mathematically. The term is used ironically in the expression Its not rocket science to indicate that a task is simple. 16  Strictly speaking, the use of science in rocket science is a misnomer since science is about understanding the origins, nature, and behavior of the universe engineering is about using scientific and engineering principles to solve problems and develop new technology. 5  17  However, science and engineering are often misused as synonyms. 5  17  18  See also  edit  Wikiversity has learning resources about Aerospace engineering American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics American Helicopter Society International Flight test Glossary of aerospace engineering Index of aerospace engineering articles List of aerospace engineering schools List of aerospace engineers List of Russian aerospace engineers Sigma Gamma Tau aerospace engineering honor society Space Power Facility References  edit   Required Education . study.com . Retrieved 2015-06-22 . .mw-parser-output cite.citationfont-styleinherit.mw-parser-output .citation qquotes.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb665Lock-green.svg9px-Lock-green.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation . cs1-lock-registration abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbdd6Lock-gray-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumbaaaLock-red-alt-2.svg9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.pngno-repeatbackground-po sitionright .1em center.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registrationcolor555.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration spanborder-bottom1px dottedcursorhelp.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon abackgroundurlupload.wikimedia.orgwikipediacommonsthumb44cWikisource-logo.svg12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.pngno -repeatbackground-positionright .1em center.mw-parser-output code.cs1-codecolorinheritbackgroundinheritborderinheritpaddinginherit.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-errordisplaynonefont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-errorfont-size100.mw-parser-output .cs1-maintdisplaynonecolor33aa33margin-left0.3em.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-o utput .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-formatfont-size95.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-leftpadding-left0.2em.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-rightpadding-right0.2em  Education, Aerospace Engineers . myfuture.com . Retrieved 2015-06-22 .  Encyclopedia of Aerospace Engineering . John Wiley  Sons , 2010. ISBN   978-0-470-75440-5 .  a b Stanzione, Kaydon Al 1989. Engineering. Encyclopdia Britannica . 18 15 ed.. Chicago. pp.  563563.  a b c NASA 2008. Steven J. Dick ed.. Remembering the Space Age Proceedings of the 50th Anniversary Conference PDF . p.  92. The term rocket scientist is a misnomer used by the media and in popular culture and applied to a majority of engineers and technicians who worked on the development of rockets with von Braun. It reflects a cultural evaluation of the immense accomplishments of the team but is nevertheless incorrect. ...  Career Aerospace Engineer . Career Profiles . The Princeton Review. Archived from the original on 2006-05-09 . Retrieved 2006-10-08 . Due to the complexity of the final product, an intricate and rigid organizational structure for production has to be maintained, severely curtailing any single engineers ability to understand his role as it relates to the final project. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Sir George Cayley .   . Retrieved 2009-07-26 . Sir George Cayley is one of the most important people in the history of aeronautics. Many consider him the first true scientific aerial investigator and the first person to understand the underlying principles and forces of flight.  Sir George Cayley British Inventor and Scientist . Britannica. n.d . Retrieved 2009-07-26 . English pioneer of aerial navigation and aeronautical engineering and designer of the first successful glider to carry a human being aloft.  Sir George Cayley . U.S. Centennial of Flight Commission . Retrieved 31 January 2016 . A wealthy landowner, Cayley is considered the father of aerial navigation and a pioneer in the science of aerodynamics. He established the scientific principles for heavier-than-air flight and used glider models for his research. He was the first to identify the four forces of flight --thrust, lift, drag, and weightand to describe the relationship each had with the other.  Kermit Van Every 1988. Aeronautical engineering. Encyclopedia Americana . 1 . Grolier Incorporated.  A Brief History of NASA . NASA . Retrieved 2012-03-20 .  Science Engineering Aerospace . Open Site . Retrieved 2006-10-08 .  Gruntman, Mike September 19, 2007. The Time for Academic Departments in Astronautical Engineering . AIAA SPACE 2007 Conference  Exposition Agenda . AIAA SPACE 2007 Conference  Exposition . AIAA . Archived from the original on October 18, 2007. Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help   Aircraft Structures in Aerospace Engineering . Aerospace Engineering, Aviation News, Salary, Jobs and Museums . Archived from the original on 2015-11-09 . Retrieved 2015-11-06 . Cite uses deprecated parameter dead-url  help   Entry education, Aerospace Engineers . myfuture.com . Retrieved 2015-06-22 .  Bailey, Charlotte 7 November 2008. Oxford compiles list of top ten irritating phrases . The Daily Telegraph . Retrieved 2008-11-18 . 10 - Its not rocket science  a b Petroski, Henry 23 November 2010. Engineering Is Not Science . IEEE Spectrum . Retrieved 21 June 2015 . Science is about understanding the origins, nature, and behavior of the universe and all it contains engineering is about solving problems by rearranging the stuff of the world to make new things.  Neufeld, Michael. Von Braun Dreamer of Space, Engineer of War First ed.. Vintage Books. pp.  xv. There has been a deep-rooted failure in the English-speaking media and popular culture to grapple with the distinction between science and engineering. Further reading  edit  Dharmahinder Singh Chand. Aero-Engineering Thermodynamics . Knowledge Curve, 2017. ISBN   978-93-84389-16-1 . External links  edit  Wikimedia Commons has media related to Aerospace engineering . NDTAeroTech.com, The Online Community for Aerospace NDT Professionals Kroo, Ilan. Aircraft Design Synthesis and Analysis . Stanford University. Archived from the original on 23 February 2001 . Retrieved 17 January 2015 . Cite uses deprecated parameter deadurl  help  Air Service Training Aviation Maintenance UK v t e Engineering Civil Architectural Construction Environmental Earthquake Geotechnical Hydraulic Mining Structural Transportation Mechanical Acoustical Aerospace Automotive Marine Railway Thermal Electrical Computer Control Electromechanics Electronics Microwaves Power Radio Frequency Telecommunications Chemical Biochemical Biological Molecular Petroleum Process Reaction Interdisciplinary Audio Biomedical Engineering mathematics Engineering mechanics Engineering physics Engineering science Fire Industrial Information Materials science Ceramics Metallurgy Polymer Mechatronics Military Nanotechnology Nuclear Optical Photonics Privacy Robotics Sanitary Security Software Systems Glossaries Engineering Aerospace engineering Civil engineering Electrical and electronics engineering Mechanical engineering Structural engineering List of engineering branches CategoryEngineering Engineering portal v t e Levels of academic degree Undergraduate ISCED level 5 Associate degree Foundation degree Higher National Diploma   Diploma of Higher Education   Certificate of Higher Education ISCED level 6 Bachelors degree Honours degree Postgraduate ISCED level 7 Masters degree Postgraduate diploma   certificate Diplom degree Engineers degree ISCED level 8 Doctorate Candidate of Sciences Other Postdoctoral Higher doctorate Doktor nauk Habilitation Docent Tenure Fellow No dominant classification Laurea Licentiate Magister degree Professional degree Graduate diploma   certificate Higher diploma Specialist degree   diploma Terminal degree Unearned Honorary degree Ad eundem degree v t e Systems engineering Subfields Aerospace engineering Biological systems engineering Configuration management Earth systems engineering and management Electrical engineering Enterprise systems engineering Performance engineering Reliability engineering Safety engineering Processes Requirements engineering Functional specification System integration Verification and validation Design review Concepts Business process System System lifecycle V-Model Systems development life cycle Tools Decision-making Function modelling IDEF Optimization Quality function deployment System dynamics Systems Modeling Language Systems analysis Systems modeling Work breakdown structure People James S. Albus Ruzena Bajcsy Benjamin S. Blanchard Wernher von Braun Kathleen Carley Harold Chestnut Wolt Fabrycky Barbara Grosz Arthur David Hall III Derek Hitchins Robert E. Machol Radhika Nagpal Simon Ramo Joseph Francis Shea Katia Sycara Manuela M. Veloso John N. Warfield Related fields Control engineering Computer engineering Industrial engineering Operations research Project management Quality management Risk management Software engineering Category Authority control GND  4474144-3 LCCN  sh95007821 NDL  01220280 Retrieved from  httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleAerospace_engineering oldid914453254  Categories  Aerospace engineering Aircraft maintenance Hidden categories CS1 errors deprecated parameters Articles to be expanded from November 2009 All articles to be expanded Articles using small message boxes Commons category link from Wikidata Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers